The Story Continues. a serial enovel by Ferd Eggan
1 Welcome to Hotel Real Desert 
But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual
development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of
mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable for
the sojourn of a night in which there are no stars and the moon is in
travail. 1
The Hotel
Hotel is next door to a perfect metaphor for the mind, and thus for
psychoanalysis. In my father's house are many mansions…To get there you
have to leave somewhere else… 
Outside of EuroDisney, on the road the farmers block to hold up the
prices of Europroduce, is the Hotel Real Desert. Once a busy place
recommended to savvy travelers ("I travel in women's undergarments, and
I always feel I can let my hair down here--four stars" Michel Foucault.)
offering ersatz Las Vegas vistas of
bacteriostatic sand and palms over the casino, the Real Desert has in
recent times had to take on the faded but patinated glamour of a
residential hotel, on an inconvenient exit ramp on the freeway from
Vienna to Paris.
Signs read: Welcome to Hotel Real Desert! Free PsychoAnalytic
Consultations! Pan-African Vegetarian Gourmandise! Last Resort Before
Disney!
The triumphant clucking of bouffanted small winners at the casino has
all but silenced, or more accurately, is hushed by the uncomprehending
sullen stares of adolescent louts sweating over video game joysticks,
deafening themselves with third-rate rap in Marsailles French.
2
Le Casino Atroce
Human adults learn to perceive this inherently fluid, relative domain
in terms of fixed, solid objects existing within fixed structures of
space and time. (a pretty Newtonian view, really) whereas the
baby-child's rudimentary perceptual processes are more consistent with
Einstein's relativistic discoveries.2
You sat in the casino bar, The Snivilling Sibbling (sic), one Wednesday
night cooling your heels in the turbid oasis waters flowing under the
barstools, as the albino bartender washed glasses and practiced flipping
vodka bottles. An evil young girl pacified a colicky toddler with wine
spritzers in her baby bottle. Your revulsion at the girl's ministrations
to the child, at her "I Love Satan" t-shirt, her ketchup-congealed pommes frites de Liberte--or perhaps it was
abreaction to the bass tones of the hip hop muzak and the screams
emanating from the serial-murderer video games--overwhelmed you. You
pulled the girl into a stall in the powder room and urged her to hold
back on the alcohol, trying to explain that she didn't have to revenge
herself on the baby.
"What is she but a vessel to be filled, a flesh bubble around Lack?"
the vixen asked. "And who am I, her sister or mother?" She continued in
that untuned a capella vibrato that teenagers take for soulful singing
these days
"Momma, I tried,
Momma, I couldn't stop the tide of tears, just like you I cried,
The world had lied, had took away our pride, the slow, sad slide
Of men that offer light girls a ride, a hookup but never a bride, Momma
I'd of died.
But you cared for me, shared bare necessity with me, dissed Felicity
with me, preyed God above for me,. "
"Stop, stop," you sobbed. "How can you say that? You're white, for
Christ's sake!"
With a certainty that it's better never to have been born than to be as
hapless as the girl, you tied her off and injected her with a killing
dose of fentanyl. As you left the bar, the little toddler was wobbling
around the coffee table, the nipple of her bottle clenched in her teeth;
almost no one turned from the video screens to see you on the way out.
The Baby Thinks
"Where'd Ana K. go?"
"Is this another one of the learning experiences I am expected to
undergo--to suffer? I guess the reason babies my age have millions of
extra neurons is so we can learn. I suppose that as a neonate I had
little choice in what happened to me and must have felt breast, warmth,
wetness, fullness without clear ideas of internal vs. external origins.
Do I need to repeat Lacan here cf. the symbolic stage w/Piaget's
sensorimotor stage of "functional recognition;" e.g., recognition that
something is "for drinking or "for wetnes. "
[She waddles over to the table and pulls a disposable diaper out of a
Minnie Mouse tote bag. Lying on her back on the floor, she pulls off her
used Pamper and replaces it with the fresh one.]
"Oh, the joy of zinc ozide,!" she burbles "Although I've never seen a
penis, I expect it's like carrying around a faucet. I've having a time
finding the muscles to pee as it is. I'm operating the circular reflex:
an outgoing impulse (e.g., leading to the contraction of a muscle)
followed not mainly by the satisfaction of
need, but rather by some incoming sensory impulse (e.g., in the eye,
urethra, etc.)" [Pressing down the self-adhesive flaps, she sits up,
bottle still in her mouth, and muses.]
"Now, however, my babyhood seems to require concentrated efforts to
construct myself, learning to be me seeing, hearing, talking and
walking. I begin to take pleasure in operating the circular reflex 'to
produce interesting spectacles.3'
"Baby-sized mentations of accomplishment, frustration, satisfaction,
deprivation attach themselves to the sensations and form the bases of my
love, anger, etc. But the way they grow has to mean that what I will
learn to call emotions are very dense mixtures of sensation and
interpretation in narrative form: I feel sad because X happened. X
happened because Y did Z to me or I did Z (to Y.) Someday I will know
that Noam Chomsky says innate human grammar requires subject, verb, and
usually object--that our human brains are wired to view and thus to talk
about the world in this way--although not necessarily in this order.
Here adult Freudians will be bound to object: 'Baby, you are conflating
organic brain with functional mind.' I dismiss this as reifying a purely
mental phenomenon; plus it's too confounding for my developmental stage.
"Instead I will consider a feeling I have begun to feel now: I am sad.
An explanation will arise very quickly. I feel sad because (I am sure by
then I will be able to imagine some causal relationship between my body,
my bottle, and the disappearance of Ana K). I'm reminded of previous
times I have felt sad and I will connect them into a series by way of
the synaptic corridors they pass through. The sad-ness itself will
already be an explanation of a somatic sensation or mental phenomenon.
Sensations are on my skin or the virtual skin, emotions are
already-processed sensations or mental phenomena S/MP + (pleasure,
satisfaction, warmth, i.e. security) = feeling OK. Wet diaper +
disappeared person + insecurity = feeling bad
[She stumbles, the bottle between her hands, held up to release the
last drops.]
"I have to say parenthetically that this new stuff in the bottle
affects the feel of things in a big way.
"Even now, my feeling OK is associated with events and people; gotta
love them (or want them or hate or fear them). These associations will
become progressively more elaborate as I accumulate more experience.
Soon I can say 'I feel I am cold and contemptuous of others because I am
afraid to experience their rejection of me,' or 'I love him because he
makes me feel secure and confident and wanted.' The explanations will
not particularly help in feeling better if one feels 'bad;' conversely,
trying to feel 'good' will not seem to be enhanced by good explanations.
I will live through years of therapists encouraging me to experience my
psychic wounds, my feelings, with the idea that I can achieve a state of
being in which pain can be experienced without debilitating
consequences.
"I will ask now, while I have extra synapses, isn't it the narrative
itself that inscribes the scars on our minds, our hearts, my future
razor-cut adolescent arms. I wonder if it just wouldn't be better to
skip the pain altogether."
[She slips, falls on her back, unconscious. Urine spreads in a pool
toward the frayed electrical cord of a Mickey's Ghost Town slot
machine.]
3
Rm. 1453 MonaLisa of the Desert.
Gazing at the Monde de Disney parking lot, MonaLisa sits framed in her
window, an ultralite cigarette in her hand, her arms supporting her
gravity-afflicted breasts, once lunar melons, now barely able to plump
up over the mass of her moist arms and the aluminum sill, cooling in the
moonlight. Her face, the face on which the ends of the earth have come
and gone, is not pensive, not secretly smiling, but cowed by the
suffering she has felt and is all too sure to feel again. She has taken
it on as weight; the excess of everything gradually pulled her pelvis
out of tilt, her bowels out of line, her womb a little adrift. She has
just returned, in fact, from the hospital where she lay under the knife
for five hours while the doctors hewed away adhesions, occlusions and
finally her ovaries and a pear-shaped mass of no longer definable
fibrous tissue. Hers is the face of a patient, drugged out of pain and
sorrow, drifting on Demerol. She felt something a few hours ago when she
came to her full animal consciousness, her autonomic systems in full
alarm at this latest outrage on her person. Mona believes she has nearly
fulfilled her aspiration to drama-less calm. "I need to keep my head
straight," Mona says to the moonlight, "no more nut-rolling on Novy or
the kids."
"I shall grow another breast
in the middle of my chest
what shall it be
not like the other ones lying there
those two fried eggs.
in the center of my flesh
I shall grow another breast
rounder than a ready fist,
slippery as a school of fish,
sounder than stone. Call it
She - Who - educates my chest.
She Who.
She is not my daughter, not my son
I'm going to groom her with my tongue
needle her senses with my pain
feed her hunches with my brain,
She Who defends me.4"
"It's a good thing I already had my two girls," she reassures herself.
The first glowed with the iridescent colors of a conch shell, of a
pussy, opening all shiny pinks, golden hair and sunlit trust until Mona,
sick with junkie pneumonia, had to give her up--a junkie ho would only
victimize her child, they told her. Her baby's sun faded in the dark and
clammy Pacific Northwest under Mona's sister's minging care. The second,
now a toddler, had the better luck of being born in a prison hospital
and fostered out to a former nun with money and horses and compassionate
love. Mona is thrilled to have her here on a visit now, just three,
unable to imagine inadequacies in parents, pleased with Mona, with
herself and with the still-pink girl she has just learned is her older
sister.
This, then, is Mona, whose children come at great pain. Mona was driven
to sobriety by the daughter once handed over to her half-sister, then
taken back (at the teen daughter's insistence that Mona's sister was not
a supportive--i.e. generous--parent). Poor Mona was then abandoned again
when her daughter returned temporarily to her dank previous home where
she became a gibbering speed freak, an auto thief, a fugitive, and
generally white trash. She and her mother share one trait, an ability to
recount the episodes when they were maimed and deprived of the halcyon
life they believe is available to normal people. "While she's here, I
have to get her head straight, too," thinks Mona, believing for a moment
that she is in charge of a life, any life.
4
Rm. 1789 A Political Tract
Lemmy Caution checks in. He immediately boots up his computer and hooks
into the net. Routing through several nodes, he finds that a message is
waiting, has been waiting for quite a while.
One starless August night much like tonight, Lemmy stumbled out of the
Burg Frieden in PrinzLauerBurg, then still E Berlin. Drunk, unable to
move his tongue, desperately lonely, he fell into the rainy gutter. When
he woke, a piece of paper was twisted in his mouth. Dried out, he read
People ask, what is the nature of the revolution that we talk about.
Who will it be made by, and for, and what are its goals and strategy?
We are within the heartland of a world-wide monster, a country so rich
from its world-wide plunder that even the crumbs doled out to the
enslaved masses within its borders provide for material existence very
much above the conditions of the masses of people of the worl。 All
of the United Airlines Astrojets, all of the Holiday Inns, all of
Hertz's automobiles, your television set, car and wardrobe already
belong, to a large degree to the people of the rest of the world. 5
He's been committed ever since, a clandestine freedom fighter,
autonomous, placing his devices alone or with a few other cadres,
exchanging plans and ideological instruction only through safe message
drops. During Vietnam, it was easier, as the Vietnamese were very astute
in their description of their People's War and the centrality of the
anti-colonial struggle against US imperialism. At first he exchanged
tangible letters, paper signs of struggle. These new electronic messages
are harder to actualize in practice, and the post-socialist world of
global empire far harder to conceptualize in terms of improvement and
barbarism. A while ago, this:
The deaths of three friends ended our military conception of what we
are doing. It took us weeks of careful talking to rediscover our roots,
to remember that we had been turned on to the possibilities of
revolution by denying the schools, the jobs the death relationships we
were "educated" for. We went back to how we had begun living with groups
of friends and fount that this revolution could leave intact the
enslavement of women if women did not fight to end and change it,
together。And marijuana and LSD and little money and awakening to
the black revolution, the people of the world. 6
But tonight, for the first time in way too long, Lemmy is to meet his
closest comrade. Oedipa Maas is the slinky trans revolutionary who first
turned on Tania Hearst, later turning on to more productive
anti-globalization struggles. Lemmy and Oedipa have not seen each other
since Seattle. As he sets out the sling and the dildos, he sings, "the
Prince of Stories would walk right by me.7"
Perceiving the onset of hallucination from the soma, Lemmy voices an
instant message into his netserver, hoping this will be sufficient
political struggle for tonight, as unsure as he is about
inter/intra-gender sexual relations.
Laughing.
Laughing.
Laugh.
Couldn't stop laughin。
at my own everyday pomposity,
the narrow arrogance of scholars,
the impudence of the rational,
the smug naiveté of words in contrast
to the raw rich ever-changing panoramas that flooded my brain.8
Lemmy shuts down the computer; the door chimes, Oedipa makes her
appearance.
5
My Dreams
"Sauvez ce qui pleure" Paul Eluard, La Capital de Douleur
A long dream of torture…my father wanted to kill Eubie, our youngest
brother. My middle brother Blake and I had to protect him. After many
suspenseful but mystifying clashes, everything was over--dad was dead.
Our mother came in and stabbed me repeatedly and then I was transferred
to two torturers…blood, piercings, exhaustion. Terror before pain, then
no strong pain…Masturbated last night--ucs. Guilt? I can't let the
murder of the kid happen--too much guilt if it doe。 Ethics from
guilt. Conscious memories of tender care for Eubie.
For the last century, the west has twisted in the meshes of a
pre-lapsarian dream: if only I hadn't been psychically wounded in
childhood I'd be all right, I'd have a healthy self.
My dad's house had many mansions. When he died we had to empty the
house and divide up his accumulations and all I got was this lousy
Schadenfreude.
Seven lean cows, all bowing down to me。
No really, I dream myself flustered by urgency and loss。need to
prevent disasters. Eubie's son wanted to ride his bike. I needed Eubie
to drive me to Noe School to find a teacher who knew what I needed to
know. delay, excruciating wait while the bike is put on the rack。 I
searched the tall room under the eaves, strewn with papers and junk,
searching, searching for the paper with the phone number。 calling
information, getting a number, not clear whether it's the number for an
operator or a direct lin。 the phone is differen。 my mother
said 'nothing's changed"。 I get hysterically angry: 'look at the
numbers on the phone. Are they different or not?' 'Yes, they are,' Aunt
MabelRuth admits things have change。 jabbering in Spanish from the
roofers across the street。 a gas-sputtering lawnmower, clattering
against the sidewalk。 I'm in my hous。 I know it's not my real
house but it's my house invaded by lying hoodlums。 who will be hurt
next?。
I think our human brains are an evolutionary accident. The difference
between chimp and human brains is very significant in terms of size
and--over time--has led to marked differences in cognition if not
perception. The difference does not look like the results of any
evolutionary pressure. The random gene changes that led to a much larger
brain do not seem to offer survival advantage commensurate with the
energy expenditure required to supply it. I conclude that our brain
began as a genetic mishap, for no more purpose than that apportioned to
any other animal, mineral or vegetable.
I am kissing my brother Blak。 now I love him。 he reluctantly
surrenders to his love for m。 his body is beautiful, athletic, warm
and welcoming。 his mouth softly moving, thrilling, familiar。
his baseball hands, his football legs. I realize now that I wasn't
jealous of him because Dad liked him best, but of my dad because Blake
liked him more than me。 Dad sees us kissing and me lying on top,
getting ready to fuck。maybe it's Blake on top。 he tells Mom.  she tells him it's o。
"We shall see people engaged in attractive occupations, giving no
thoughts to material wants, free from all pecuniary cares and anxieties.
As women and children all work, there will be no idlers, all will earn
more than they consume. Universal happiness and gaiety will reign. A
unity of interests and views will arise, crime and violence disappear.
There will be no individual dependence---no private servants, only
maids, cooks, and so forth all working for all (when they please).
Elegance and luxury will be had by all.9".
6
The Clouds Above the Real Desert
Joseph in contemplation: "The Cloud of Unknowing is the cloud of
electrons around the nucleus--here/not here, energy/matter-- either,
depending on what's happening, the universe's rules of operation. A
Joshua Tree grows even in this unreal desert, cells grow,
photosynthesis, the works. The tree, as the rule of the physical
universe would have it, reflects light. In the universe humans inhabit,
reflecting light is a necessary result of the assemblage of matter on
earth--necessary also to the survival of the tree and to its presence
among other trees, rocks, animals." Pumping his harmonium, he sings:
Song of the Joshua Tree
that Josh is about fifteen feet tall
tree tissue organized to move water from root to crown
osmotic pressure, umm. hmm, and transpiration through the leaves
we are to presume that the tree knows nothing
--it has no brain--
it's more primitive than "real" trees
but it can repair itself, and it can react
--slowly, I say, umm . hmm--
to phenomena, emergent or adverse.
its cells are sensitive to the pressures (pleasures):
quickening sap and warm breezes
reflecting light greenly
the Joshua Tree fallaciously, pathetically,
likes afternoon light,
likes being seen
just so, just so.um. hmm
by discriminating coyotes and quails.
"I wish I knew enough to assert clearly that this Spinozan10, rather than Kantian, idea of human perception as a
necessary and proportionate interaction of human body with tree,
obviates any quibbling about whether or not matter is just our idea of
things."
[The] discernment of relatively invariant entities and processes and
the creation of mental maps where the key coordinates map relatively
stable things,. may be the most practical way to be an animal on this
planet--else why would we make the mistake of believing in solidity and
fixity?11
"Else why do we? I want to assert that molecules, atoms, photons,
electrical and chemical energy, make us see
the Joshua Tree. The tree gives: it 'trees' to us. We see it: we can't
help it, the rods and cones react to light, the reactions excite a few
cells, then more and more. Brain studies seem to indicate that the
excitations are not on/off--not digital, but analog--the
neurotransmitters and electrical flow are emergent properties of the
eye-brain-mind process that are modulable over an infinite range, not
merely by quantifiable increments of cell firings and cell non-firings.
And they are not yet coded, nor are they in language. Afterwards,
apparently 500 milliseconds after, we are looking at the tree and
utilizing previous neural pathways in relation to the tree.
"Only then are we 'affected' by the tree, and only then do we cogitate
an idea, which is coded, is in symbols, of 'tree.' No part of this is
any more or less 'real' or objective. It must take active work to look
at the tree: the reception of minimal sensory input is necessary not
sufficient by itself to arouse attention, our eye-brain-minds select
which datum is to be enriched through concentration. From there the
processing must actively combine memories, previous categorizations and
new data through neural connections. A particular tree becomes a tree in
many contexts, as if the brain makes as many as possible available from
which to draw.
"And if this is true of a mere tree, a fortiori
it is even more true of human interaction."
…'Just as he looks now!' and I saw Lord Mellifont stand before us with
his sketch-block. I took in as we met him that he appeared neither
suspicious nor blank; he simply stood there, as he stood always
everywhere, for the principal feature of the scene. Naturally he had no
sketch to show us, but nothjng could have better rounded off our actual
conception of him than the way he fell into position as we approached
(…) We stayed while the exhibition went on, and the conscious profiles
of the peaks might to our apprehension have been interested in his
success. (…[He gave Blanche the water-colour sketch]. )
'He'll have to rest after this,' Blanche said, dropping her eyes on her
water-colour.
'Indeed he will!' I raised mine to the window: Lord Mellifont had
vanished. "He's already reabsorbed.'12
7
Suite C-3.3 Dialogue on The Anthropic Principle13
Cyril Burst and Vyvyan Lord Throbbing are seated together on a
reassuringly threadbare Louix XV, mauvely gazing at the vermillion
lights over the Real Aqua Swimming Pool.
Cyril: I say, Vyvyan, pass me a gold-tipped cigarette, there's a dear.
You know, you butch thing, many cosmologists posit different levels of
universes, hoping thereby to answer questions regarding the seeming
uniqueness of our own. Dr Martin Rees, of Cambridge and the Astronomer
Royal, says contemplating alternate universes could help scientists
distinguish which features of our own universe are fundamental and
necessary and which are accidents of cosmic history. A light, pet?
Vyvyan: Oh, Cyril, when you talk like this I am aflame! Stroke my
hyacinth hair and tell me ours is the cosmic accident. You may randomly
kiss my slim-gilt lips.
Cyril: Oh, don't!. Dr Alan Guth of MIT introduced idea of inflation
in 1980. His--the most artistic--universe is getting larger, and going
faster. Guth says the universe is "the ultimate free lunch."
Vyvyan: I love a free lunch, if it costs someone a great deal. Let's
feast on nightingales' tongues and sip absinthe. I'll call down for more
music and madder wine.
Cyril: Oh, fickler than Willie Hughes! I long for constants like the
speed of light. Only a narrow range of settings (for these constants) is
suitable for the evolution of complexity or Life as We Know It.
Vyvyan: Life as What? Say it again about the multiverse.
Cyril: I will not. I try continually to avoid repetition.
Vyvyan: What?
Cyril: I try continually。 Oh! Ashbery!
Vyvyan: Auden! Auden!. So my dear, despite these deafening drapes,
is this a lucky universe, or what?
Cyril: In 1974 Dr Brandon Carter, a theoretical physicist at MIT
posited "the Anthropic Principle," asseverating that these coincidences
were not just luck, but were rather necessary preconditions for us to be
looking at the universe. After all, we are hardly likely to discover
laws that are incompatible with our own existence.
Vyvyan: Our mission, Cyril: contra the laws
promulgated by fundamentalists, as in Iran or the United States.
Cyril: How thrillingly political of you to say so, Vyvyan my unicornus.
Freeman Dyson, another physicist, once said, "The universe in some sense
must have known we were coming."
Vyvyan: Yep!
Cyril: Dr Steven Weinberg is positively Miltonic in his comments on the
universe, which he sees bubbling progeny like yeast buds. According to
string theory, Dr. Hogan of Washington says, the laws of physics that we
mortals experience are low-energy, 4 dimensional shadows, of sorts, of a
10- or 11-dimensional universe. cosmological constant.
Ah, here's a snack; I'm ravenously puckis.  Oh! I thought you ordered
carpaccio, but this is turnip tartare with nasturtium!
Vyvyan: My own, economise now! And you are looking a trifle
cosmological yourself.
Cyril: Well, if you say so, my precious little fatty. Now, according to
astronomical observations, otherwise undetectable energy--"dark
energy"-- accounts for about two-thirds of the mass-energy of the
universe today, outweighing matter two to one. But according to modern
quantum physics, empty space should be seething with energy that would
outweigh matter in the universe by far, far more, by a factor of at
least 1060.
Vyvyan: And what to wear in dark energy? So the speeding-up of
inflation lends more energy than was thought to exist? And the
cosmological constant,, a formula to account for this discrepancy, must
be within ranges compatible with us!
Cyril: Just, just so. And, as we know, the logical consequence of this
is that we "queers" in our indolence have seen through the canard of
vulgar Marxism. We live the principle that production is not the basis
of human lif.  Instead it is enjoyment! Fourier!
Vyvyan: Ergo, my dear Cyril, what all we humans do is enjoy the
impingement of this probably-unique world on us and ours on it, just
like the lilies of the field. How lovely to be wanted by the entire
universe, just so!
8
Suite K-347 The Mirror of Production
14
Flicking her jet beads at a bat, feeling very horny, Karen, Countess
Dinesen-Youssopoff (nee Blitzen) can barely keep herself still on her
twilit balcony. She is waiting for what this hotel obligingly calls "un
ouvrier de santé sexuelle." Her daily meal of a strawberry and a glass
of champagne long over, she smokes another opium-laced cigarette as she
strokes her ropy throat. Through a geneology almost impossible to trace,
Karen is the grand daughter of Prince Felix Youssopoff, the Russian
queen who killed Rasputin. He made a Morganatic marriage, fled to
Denmark after the Revolution and spent years intriguing with White
Russians. Karen managed to recover her grandfather's Baku oil refineries
and grew richer through the sale of his Rembrandts and a suit against
CBS Television that proved her grandfather actually did murder the
Czarina's starets.15
She reads from her commonplace book, makes a notation in her crabbed
half-Cyrillic hand.
"The productive-man notion of Marx 'hallucinates man's predestination
for the objective transformation of the world (or for the 'production'
of oneself: today's generalized humanist theme--it is no longer a
question of 'being' oneself but of 'producing' oneself, from conscious
activity to the primitive 'productions' of desire16". Karen dials her message machine to leave this memorandum: "B
quotes Marx for whom men 'begin to distinguish themselves from animals
as soon as they begin to produce their means of subsistence…' Remember
that."
She asks Merle, her Maltese, "Why must man's vocation always be to
distinguish himself from animals? Is man's existence an end for which he
must find the means?"
Sliding back the curtain on the sidelight of the door a little, Karen B
critiques the notion of production of subsistence: "it is the
instrumentalization of nature." She summons up Marx: 'Labor is, in the
first place, a process in which both man and nature participate, and in
which man of his own accord starts, regulates and controls the material
re-actions between himself and nature. He opposes himself to nature as
one of her own forces, setting in motion arms and legs, head and hands,
the natural forces of his body, in order to appropriate nature's
productions in a form adapted to his own wants.'17"
"How tedious," Karen sighs. "Why can't these men see that labor is not
the basis of human existence? Even Marcuse, for all his slavering after
erotic freedom, says labor is grounded 'in an essential excess of human
existence beyond every possible situation in which it finds itself and
the worl。 [it] is necessary and eternally 'earlier' than play: it
is the starting point, foundation and principle of play insofar as play
is precisely a breaking off from labor and a recuperation for labor.18' But that is so wrong!"
Taking her own version of luxury in an Henri III (1551-1589)
straight-back wooden chair, Karen tightens her black toque and murmurs,
"Marx doesn't see that in his symbolic exchanges primitive man (sic)
does not gauge himself in relation to Nature. He is not aware of
Necessity, a Law that takes effect only with the objectification of
Nature."
"Primitive 'society' does not exist as an instance apart from symbolic
exchange; and this exchange never results from an 'excess' of
production. It is the opposite: to the extent that these terms apply
here, 'subsistence' and 'economic exchange' are the residue of symbolic
exchange, a remainder.' "
Impatiently re-telling her jet beads, she thinks, "survival is not a
principle. We have made it one." She remembers Africa and her other
lover, Jean Baudrillard, saying "For the primitives, eating, drinking,
and living are first of all acts that are exchanged: if they are not
exchanged, they do not occur. It is symbolic exchange, where the
relation (not the 'social') is tied, and this exchange excludes any
surplus: anything that cannot be exchanged or symbolically shared would
break the reciprocity and institute power. Better yet, this exchange
excludes all 'production.'"
"Good old Jean," she sighs, "stealing from Bataille like that."
The door chimes. A gorgeous young Arab rings her bell. With highly
stylized sincerity, long eyelashes down, he tells Karen he is at her
service. "My name is Ahmed Oedipus Ben Maas," he says, "and for me,
'work' is something other than labor…The artisan lives his work as a
relation of symbolic exchange, abolishing the definition of himself as
'laborer' and the object as 'product of his labor.' "
"Above all," Karen adds, lighting two of her cigarettes in the red gash
of her mouth, "artisanal work is, according to etymology, 'demiurge.'"
9 Rm. 1876 Ferd on the Brain
I'm on assignment, re-building the organ at the "Petit Monde"
experience at Euro Disney. Oddly, though the singing children are
totally animatronic, dancing and piping their tunes by virtue of
computer 1s and 0s, the organ is manual (and pedal). I spend my days
scrambling through forests of big and little pipes, for it is a very big
organ.
One Sunday evening I'm relaxing around this musty French pool,
reminiscing about a day in LA in 1992 when some rich queen threw a pool
party for People With AIDS up in the hills, within spitting distance of
the Hollywood Sign. Boys with purple blotches all over their backs and
chests played in the sunny water, while a few long-timers sat in
wheelchairs, wrapped in bright blankets, wheeled mushrooms in big straw
hats. It was in that pool that I met Ferd.
Ferd was not the host--he had no more money than it takes to buy a used
Toyota pickup--but he was the big cheese because he was the director of
the PWA group bubbling on the lawn with precious-- tentative--joy in the
sunshine. We all loved Ferd then. He was healthy enough to work for our
benefit 16 hours a day, he was edgy enough to get our group funded at
the vanguard of sexual healing as both treatment and prevention
strategy. Ferd was a little like our figurehead as we breasted the
waves, our sun king as he ordered the world with and for us, and a
little like a social director who, under his bonhomie, was transparently
terrified of friendship.
He slid into the water next to me and we bobbed up and down smiling and
cruising, I trying to assure myself I was still cute and attractive,
Ferd called upon to concentrate so long on one person that sexual desire
snuck up on him unbidden--in fact, he would later say, unpermitted in
his job as director and animator of our clump of radical patients and
victims, since a sexual liaison would reduce his availability to
"listen, handhold, inspire, cajole, hug, solace" the others he thought
in his care. That afternoon he pulled himself out of the pool with a
slight turgidity visible in the folds of his floppy yellow trunks and
smiled as if he expected to be back to bob some more with me.
He didn't come back soon, not until after I fended off a handsome guy
with really bad AZT breath, who I knew wasn't likely to take up with me
anyway. He was already twice a widow of wealthier, lonelier men who left
him houses and money for cosmetic surgery. I had nothing to offer but
sweaty organs.
"We're walking next door to look at Aldous Huxley's house," Ferd said
when he came back, smelling of sunblock, lime and vodka. "Want to come
along?" I did. The Huxley property, explained our host, was really just
a crater as a fire had destroyed the building where Aldous wrote and
took his LSD, where Laura struggled on alone until 1979. The Hollywood
Sign was so close that the OOD took up most of the view on one side.
Ferd started in about his acid trips. He had met Leary at Millbrook
once in 67, he had done light shows at the Fillmore with Janis, Country
Joe, The Incredible String Band (one of his fey favorites), Sly and the
Family Stone at the Electric Circus. "I wish there was still acid to be
taken," he said, "now that I'm not scared about blurting out 'I'm gay'
to some straight hippie companion."
"That must have happened twenty years ago," I replied. "Surely you've
come to terms with all of that by now. After all, here we are all
together, having fun, living proof that God doesn't punish the wicked
with anything more than painful, ugly death and stigmatized suffering."
"Yes, surely I should feel cheered by your reminder of how good we have
it," Ferd said. "But let's don't call each other Shirley. Actually I
take anti-depressants now, so I don't bother with scared or unhappy any
more.
"I think our consciousness should be altered, early and often." he told
me, his good eye engaging mine. "We need to experience being without
relation to time--escape from a conception of a forward moving series of
events the most sense-rich of which felt as the present and less rich
assigned to a recallable but fading past. Further, the brain's capacity
to take in and re-view sensory input led to the development of neural
pathways that could access and perceive or experience the occurrence of
review and cogitate on the process itself. Sensory input is reviewed
through the same neural pathways (or analogous or related or proximate
ones) that process raw sensory input. It is unclear whether the brain
always knows the difference between processing the sensory input we
usually think of as perception of reality and processing the processing
which, as mirrors can reflect each other, can approach infinity as sense
data become perceptions, become organized ideas, become abstract
categories and then categories of categories. Given what little is
understood about the brain, it is not possible to say whether these
processes are or are not organized in hierarchies. The brain may assign
more or less attention energy, ranking by importance or immediacy or
proximity or some other order--or not.
"The result of all this, I think, is that humans have a brain that
processes sensory and internal mental phenomena at too many levels, too
often, too much, with inadequate mechanism to turn the processing off.
We have brains too good for our own good; we think and abstract feelings
and memories too much. This ceaseless idling is what we have learned to
call our feelings, however remote the neural processing may be from
somatic reactions to events perceived as happening now. Like HAL2000,
our brain (and by brain I keep trying to mean all the data processing
mechanisms from senses to memory to thinking) thinks what it does is
real. What psychological literature and philosophy have always
confounded--the subject and object and later the divided subject--become
less compelling as explanation and certainly as a concept to provide a
comfortable relation to 'external reality.' But the brain is best seen
as actively seeking, processing and thinking at all levels
simultaneously: consciousness is a trick of our brains describing us to
ourselves, stringing processes and events into a self, asserting to us
that the self of today is the same one as any other day, selecting data
and memories to substantiate itself."
"Yeah, you're right," I said. I never thought he was sexy after that.
10 Reception Desk
While MonaLisa recuperates, her girlfriend Novy might fill in at the
front desk. Usually dressed for her main job as Conductor on Wild Ride
de M. Toad, she would be irritable in a pantsuit that barely stretches
across her chest and chafes her crotch. Novy might be musing about her
lover or daydreaming about her brothers. She'd not be impressed by the
small bald man across the counter, signing in as Mobe 68.
"Will you be needing any special attentions, Mr. Mobe 68?"
"No, just be sure my car is plugged in to the charger and send up 12
bottles of Vichy water. And put Ferd in the room next to mine."
"Very good, Mr. Mobe 68. And here are the keys for you and Mr. Ferd."
She might think to herself that these two were pop music has-beens from
2002; she'd put them in the smelly suite on the fourth floor.
"Overlooking the pool, nice views."
As they walk toward the elevator, the organ grinder might come up to
them and ask, "Aren't you。?"
"Yes, I'm. M.
"Ferd? Remember me from Being Alive PWA parties?"
"Oh yes, I remember . u. Bill, . Aldous Huxley! And of course you
recognize my boss, Mo。"
"Never mind, just meet me upstairs. Nice,。Bill?"
All three would look at their shoes (one pair of Pradas, two pairs of
canvas sneakers) as Mobe 68 walks away.
"Well, that wasn't a bit awkward. So Bill, how funny to see you here.
What are you doing?"
Bill might be feeling a little nonplussed himself, and may already be
regretting this encounter. In an attempt to make things easier he might
answer, "I'm rebuilding an organ at EuroDisney, and I'm running pretty
late. Can we have a drink later and catch up?"
"Of course, let's call each other. I'm up in what they call the
Vice-Presidential Suite. Mo' is a great guy and more a friend than a
boss, really."
"Cool. Call you tonight." He'd kiss Ferd and walk quickly to the Disney
shuttle outside.
Mobe 68 meanwhile would have gone up, sharing the elevator with an
middle-aged Black man who looks very familiar.
"Are you a musician?"
"I was, for a long time. Chicago Art Ensemble. Joseph is my name."
"Wow! Joseph Jamaal, I saw you play in Chicago a few years ago, Your
chanting and clarinet were awesome! With Leroy Jenkins doing incredible
things on the violin. I'm Mobe 68."
"Thanks, young man. I've heard your music too. Here to do a recording
gig?"
"No, man, I have no plans at all. I just travel now."
At the third floor, an emaciated woman could get on carrying a Maltese
with rheumy eyes and a bad underbite, as Joseph walks off, saying.
"Well, here's my floor. Nice to meet you, Mobe 68, but be cool--the past
is emptiness; 'here and now.'19"
The woman, Countess Yousopoff-Blitzen, might not be concerned that the
elevator is going up. She would know that her WTO colleagues wait for
her in the Snivilling Lounge. She'd look up, expecting a mirrored
ceiling, smoothing her throat and lighting a cigarette.
"Excuse me, I don't think you can smoke in here," Mobe 68 objects.
"Silence," Karen would croak and jab the down button. "This must be
your floor. Please get out."
As Mobe 68 turns his key, he could be trying to concentrate on
Christian compassion and the tasks ahead of him.
11 Foucault's Nephew
Come rain or shine, my custom is to go for a stroll in Disney's Idiocy
of Rural Life environment every afternoon about five. I hold discussions
with myself on politics, love, taste or philosophy, and let my thoughts
wander in complete abandon, leaving them free to follow the first wise
or foolish idea that comes along, like those young rakes we see in the
Repressed Sexuality Land who run after a giddy-looking little piece with
a laughing face, sparkling eye and tip-tilted nose, only to leave him
for another, accosting them all, but sticking to none.
If it is too cold or wet I take shelter in the American TacoBilious
Café and amuse myself watching hustlers play Texas Hold-'em. One day
after dinner there I was, watching a great deal but saying little and
listening to as little as I could, when I was accosted by one of the
weirdest characters in this Land of ours that has not been sparing of
them. The notions of good and evil must be strangely muddled in his
head, for the good qualities nature has given him he displays without
ostentation, and the bad ones without shame. Marcel is devilishly good
looking, a queer bird, and has made himself the boon companion of every
rich party boy in all of EuroDisney. He comes by it honestly, as he is
the "nephew" of the great Michel Foucault.
He accosts me: "Hello, Mr. Philosopher. Are your thoughts consoling you
in these troubling times?"
I: Not much, but when I have nothing better to do I enjoy watching the
players.
HE: Oh, they're not here to be watched. Not at these prices!
Thirty-five euros a quarter, whew!
I: And how have you been keeping yourself? I heard you were hooked up
with Dr. Dread who runs the Red Hanky Pavilion. No new vice squad
complications there?
HE: No, he's turned it into an 18+ dance floor, and it's writhing with
e-trash heteroid clothes hangers. Now it's called American Idyll.
I: Don't you welcome the acceptance of our kind? Imitation is sincere
flattery?
HE: If that's acceptance, fuck it. "If we are all part of God," as the
saintly Mrs. Cresswell said, "then God must indeed be horrible.20" I can't see anything
special in being queer anymore. "We're all over!" they keep screamin. 
Yes, yes. We're over. We're passé and boring. Though some clueless
ladies continue to sing. "queer planet."
I: You however, continue pursuing "practices and pleasures?" You must
have clients up the。
HE: Up! Just to play for a brief 16-hour party. Ugh, the prep. (Marcel
suddenly began to act out his words with the most extraordinary
postures. )
Trimming, then shaving your balls. I fell in the bathtub the other day.
I was standing on the edge, trying to see my ass to shave it, when I
slipped and cracked a disc. Now my hands tingle all the time. Then
there's the cleaning out. the showershot or worse, the bag. and the
10-day, 20-day runs. slammers the worst. I finally said to Dr. Dread
that he was a sleazy old fairy buying muscles instead of love. He sent
me to the EuroComfort Inn for 2 days and now I'm on the street again.
They only let me stay at the Real Desert Hotel, and in a mildewed room
they can't rent, cause my uncle once endorsed the place.
I: It's no wonder you are so abandoned, Marcel For that matter, doesn't
crystal just exaggerate our fundamental alone-ness in the world?
HE: Mr. Philosopher, I may be tweaking, but I know my ontology. "It's
understandable, but wrong, the notion that each of us is alone,
imprisoned within the individual cranium, when in fact even the physical
universe of matter depends on us to exist, and even more desperately the
sperm and egg that make us and the genes and social conditions that
shape each of us. The other is always before us, demanding that we be
selves in response. It's fatuous (no, self-centered and delusional) to
think we think alone. Our mythologies of lost or fractured selves
gluttonize--slobber--over the illusions of sameness and difference, self
and other."21
I: You know all of this is artifact of language, no? Althusser?
HE: I've been interpellated more times than you can count. When I am
interpellated then I am clocked, called out, made to answer to hey you,
but the you I create (in response) has to answer back, has to
interpellate the cop. I is always a response, not to the mirror, but to
an other. All the world--Disney included, is hung up on the fears of
alienation, disintegration that our dear fathers lived to feel.
My own uncle! All of this is the tragedy of the last Century. WWI
frightened Europe out of its class complacency and squelched important
social movements. The Revolution of 1917 created a hope, and at least a
pole of support for liberation of the colonies. The Great Depression
frightened the world into a few Keynesian reforms, but then WWII sent
all our men to war, let them kill in the company of other men, and then
sent them home to individual suburban families. None of them knew how to
be with women or children, so then came the baby boom. Feeding on
schedule or feeding on demand, but overfeeding. And the Cold War and the
Draft to Viet Nam. My own father and mother are still lost, tripping in
the Algerian desert somewhere since the 60s.
No wonder the 60s were aflame. Children left to crusade against racism,
war, sexual oppression. Suddenly, Marcel shouts, Tim, come over here,
man!
I: Who is this angelic youth with white hair making toward us?
HE: Timmy Tilden, nephew of Bill Tilden, tennis star of the 20s and
30s, who was imprisoned twice for sex with teenage boys, died in 1953.
Poor man, his only girlfriend said he "felt things so deepl. I never
saw him with anybody who could have been his confidant. How must it be
like that22?"
I: Can we change our lives?
HE: I hope so. She said "There must have been so many things deep
within him that he could never talk about. I suppose he died of a broken
heart." Anyway, Bill's younger brother hooked up with Tim's mom--she was
a maid for Tracy Lord but the Tildens ran her out of Philadelphia with a
film crew. A long story shortened: .her grandson, the Tilden's
grand-nephew, was rescued from a homeless shelter in Hollywood and
brought to France by Mr. Sithole. Tim's exceptional looking, but stay
away. He's seventeen, falling into bad habits already : an albino black
marketeer--small-time drugs, cheap diamond smuggling--he's so innocent
he'll hurt you.
I: And why do you have so much to say about this dangerous young man?
HE: Because he's my young bud, aren't you Timmy? I take care of my
red-eyed little polar bear.
TIMMY: You know I hate that name! Can you get me a drink, please?
HE: I'll get you all you need Tim. Come and party with a couple
military studs? It's all set up, they just called on my cel. In my room
tonight? Lots of favors!.
On that note, I made my adieux, and strolled off to TomorrowLand.
12
Rm. 1954 Joseph and His Brother
Joseph Jamaal is not completely enthused to be recognized, as he is a
fugitive from US justice, accused (falsely) of complicity in Black
Liberation Army killings of police in the 1970s. He is waking his
employer, Siegfried Rheinfahrt, from his midmorning nap. Laying aside
volumes of Lenin and Heidegger, he massages the old man's knees until he
opens his ice-blue eyes.
"Ja. aah。 In the jugness of the jug, sky and earth dwel.. 23
"You are awake now, Herr Siegfried," Joseph says calmly.
"Ahh, Joseph," he croaks. "I think I understand. Kant talks about
things in the same way as Meister Eckhart and means by this term 'thing'
something that is. But for Kant, that which is becomes the object of a
representing that runs its course in the self-consciousness of the human
ego. The thing-in-itself means for Kant: the object-in-itself. To Kant,
the character of the 'in-itself' signifies that the object is an object
in itself without reference to the human act of representing it, that
is, without the opposing 'ob-' by which it is first of all put before
this representing act. :'Thing -in-itself,' thought in a rigorously
Kantian way, means an object that is no object for us, because it is
supposed to stand, stay put, without a possible before; for the human
representational act that encounters it.' It is very materialist,
despite the awful neologisms."
Joseph straightens Siegfried's sparse white hair and tells him, "The
Buddha teaches that sense impressions can be understood as relationships
of conscious being to being. The "categories" of Kant only interfere
with this relationship. Heidegger is closer."
"Ja, yes, I think so." He reads " 'This appropriating mirror-play of
the simple onefold of earth and sky, divinities and mortals, we call the
world. The world presences by worldin。 ' "
Joseph reads further, "'That means: the world's worlding cannot be
explained by anything else nor can it be fathomed through anything else.
This impossibility does not lie in the inability of our human thinking
to explain and fathom n this way. Rather, the inexplicable and
unfathomable character of the world's worlding lies in this, that causes
and grounds remain unsuitable for the world's worlding. ' Herr
Siegfried, Heidegger is saying what the Buddha says--'As soon as human
cognition here calls for an explanation, it fails to transcend the
world's nature, and falls short of it. The human will to explain just
does not reach to the simpleness of the simple onefold of worlding'.
This is pretty good dharma teaching."
"Joseph my Black brother, what can an old Communist like me do with
this dharma? Am I just disappointed at the end of all I believed in? Is
there no revolution to be made, now?"
"The wheel turns," Joseph says with compassion. He helps his patient to
the bathroom, where Siegfried hopes to squeeze a few drops through his
urethra. While Siegfried sits and reminisces about Trevi, Joseph
replaces his books and prepares him a lunchtime fentanyl injection.
"Would you like your yogurt enema before or after? I can read to you
from the April Theses 24 if you like."
"No, Joseph, sing for me, and play the harmonium. Sing the 'Red Thread
Blues.'"
The Red Thread Blues
25
The vitality of living labor
Confronts the dead power of capitalist command
I say autonomist theory contrasts the vitality of living labor
With the dead power of capitalist command
The working people historically assert their power
to take the structures in their hands.
Intrinsic to the capital-relation
Is the class struggle of the working class
Prior to and more dynamic than capitalist restructuring
Is the class struggle that constitutes the working class
Think of the demand for an eight-hour day;
it kicked the bosses in the ass.
Yes, people, productive labor
Is now that which produces society itself
Let's use the combination of our productive labor
To sieze freedom however momentarily and redistribute wealth
Autonomists say we can communicate our social inventiveness
and make the world something else.
 
The active subject of production
Is the increasingly undifferentiated working class
The wellspring of change in production
Is the self-autonomizing working class
Beyond mere resistance are moments of freedom;
they're real but then they pass.
Capital's restructurings "subsume" not only the workplace
But society as a whole
I tell you in its processes of globalization
Reproduction of labor power occupies a crucial but unacknowledged role
That's why welfare moms are threatening,
and they had to end the dole
Guerillas moved like fish in the water
Threatening to cut off resources and lands
Oh yeah, in Vietnam, Guatemala and elsewhere liberation fighters
Challenged resource allocation in the jungles and the sands
The fall of communism, sadly,
demobilized support for progressive guerilla bands.
Global capital then broke down traditional village structures
Marched women and children off the farm to town
Tragically, capital emiseration in favela and shanty
Is what happens when age-old geography breaks down
But international mass migrations result in newer combinations,
where resistance can abound.
Husbands dead, women and children are left with "free" choices
To choose between child laborers or whores
A prerequisite for capitalist modernization
Is a landless desperate, anomic labor force
War, disease and famine,
threaten to cut off food production at the source.
But struggle to create ourselves as subjects
Disrupts and tears apart systems of capitalist rule
Despite regimes of power, humans make themselves subjects
Sabotaging, rectifying, evading, the intentions of global rule
Sometimes distorted and mistaken,
self-creation is quite evident among youth in school.
In the north abandoned plants and ruined communities
Where privilege is evanescing, no longer so secure
In the south devastation and dollar-a-month factories
But then moments of freedom where people's relationships are less
obscure
Creative combinations of people
are what the global dominators most fear.
The points where operations can be ruptured
Affirm labor's fundamental otherness from capital
Let's put our hands to the points to be ruptured
And assert that we are sentient like any other plants and animal
We'll show the Blairs and Cheneys
that their hierarchies of power can be overturned, not
just disrupted!
"Siegfried, did you know it's taken me years to be able to sing blues?"
Joseph remembers how impatient he was in 1965, how unsophisticated Otis
Spann seemed, saying on the radio, "If you don't dig the blues, you've
got a hole in your soul." How Joseph and his peers wanted to move ahead,
express the complexity of new feelings, of the new situation they faced.
You had to respect those bluesmen, but we knew they couldn't understand
what needed to be done.26
"I didn't understand, really. I was so moved by James Baldwin--the sins
of our fathers. We wanted the Art Ensemble's music to go further than
Ornette or Coltrane, way beyond what we thought good ol' blues could do.
I wish I knew then what I've had to learn so slowly."
13 In the NightKitchen
Caprice Sithole sets down her paring knife in the bowl of okra. She
whistles through the gap in her front teeth as she reads from the Herald
Tribune:
"This is the first communiqué from the ELF Liberation Front Today, in a
worldwide coordinated action, Operation Heraclitean Fire, we have burned
out all the HumVee vehicles-- "hummers"-- in the Disney "parks" in
Japan, California, Florida, France. These monster guzzlers turn the
hydrocarbon resources of the Developing --read, super-exploited-- World
into fumes of asphyxiation that linger low to the earth. We struck a
blow for little people of all ages. And don't forget, "hummer" used to
mean something nice."
Caprice worries about her husband. "I'm happy they can't pin this on
him. He's been on the job day and night since he got back." She enjoys a
humorous, danger-filled marriage with Ndabaningi Sithole III. His
Reverend uncle was the founder of ZAPU (1961), then ZANU (1963 with
Robert Mugabe), then tried for attempted assassination of Robert Mugabe
in 199627. Caprice and Neddy had to beg and borrow
100,000 zimdollars to escape from Zimbabwe, leaving their professions
and the revolutionary opposition for cooking28.and
managing the Hotel Real Desert.
Neddy has recently returned from one of his frequent "investment
opportunities," driving a fleet of trucks through the United States
paying thousands of pre teens to take paper napkins from McDonald's and
other fast food venues. He ships them home and to countries in Central
Asia with moderate profits. Interpol is already searching for The Napkin
Ring. Caprice believes they must change their activities.
"The bigger profits are in sanitary napkin dispensers. Just try to get
Kotex or Tampax in Harare," she counsels her husband. Neddy is not
convinced; he is at work modifying and lowering electric dryers for
wipe-with-your-hands countries.
Their children Xoliswa and Jonah, think he is so old-fashioned. The
only Zimbabweans on their minds are Stella Chiweshe29 and Oliver Mtukudzi--and sometimes Methembe Ndlovu30 and the Highlanders football team. To make
downloading of their music stars easier, they wish their country back in
the Commonwealth and the IMF.31
14 Valet Parking
Two black HumVees bearing the World Security Operations S.A. logo pull
to the curb. Two jar-headed young men, right hands inside the lapels of
their black Purple Label suits, each carrying a titanium computer case
handcuffed to his wrist, step out of the vehicles and survey the
perimeter. From the back seat, a man with deep-set eyes, black-browed
under a silver military haircut, commands them to park the cars
themselves and secure them. "We are meeting with the WTO crowd in
fifteen minutes. Check for digital positioning and, of course,
explosives-- and shred these papers."
He strides, as erect as always, to meet the manager, who is
obsequiously bowing to greet the new arrival. "You are Mr. Oliver South?
Would you like to go to your rooms, or shall I take you directly to the
bunker room? Any papers you wish to prepare?"
"It's Colonel South. (USMC, Ret.) Please get me a bottle of Absolut and
some Vichy water," South curtly replies. "You may take me to the
Countess."
"I will personally bring your drinks, and Achmed will take you across.
Achmed!"
Inspecting the Arab-looking beauty through a flat green lens, South
presently says, "OK. You're clean. Lead on." At age 51, South retains
the body tension of a US Marine of 30, but the Christian fascist
ideology of his more physical early career has been tempered by a
philosophical acquiescence to his and others' weaknesses. A co-founder
of WSO, South knows the World Traders are near to discharging his firm
over the flaming stink at Disney.
"It's a very low-intensity operation," he says to himself, "and the
fanatic amateurs can hurt children lining up for rides if we don't find
them fast. More than reputations are at stake. I wish it was as
clear-cut as Vietnam, or even Nicaragu。Africans all over this place
too. Our own barbarians vs theirs now!"
"Get the generalissimo a bottle, " the manager tells Novy.
The jarheaded men return, both on cel phones. One is seen nodding and
looking in the direction of Marcel, who is also on his cel--all checking
watches.
15
Party Out of Bounds
As Tim walks in between sheets of black plastic, Marcel is yelling
"Attention!" at the two jarheaded men from the HumVees.
"Strip you maggots," Marcel barks. Tim is not sure whether he should
take his own clothes off. In doubt, he sits on one of the mattresses
strewn about the slippery floor.
"Put these on each other, pigs," Marcel continues to shout, throwing
black latex jockstraps at the naked men. "Come here, Tim," he growls.
"Put these blindfolds on them and this mask on your own face. And get
into those leather chaps."
As Tim covers their faces, Marcel handcuffs the two and pulls chains
down from the rafters. "Hook these guys u。 Take this belt and
batter their backsides while I get some hits ready to slam them up."
The musty room above the garages is a storehouse for all the junk and
detritus left behind over the 75 years the hotel has accepted guests.
But tonight, a smeary cubicle has been put up with a staple gun,; the
party space confined to the penumbra of a tall white candle, the
flickering light and mysterious aroma of beeswax disorienting the
jarheads. Marcel adjusts two monitors to play continuous hardcore porn
to a soundtrack of Bartok and Lygeti, and strews condoms, paper towels
and Crisco cans all around the mattresses on the plastic-coated floor.
In a baritone of arrogated authority, he says to the men stretched
before him, "We will cultivate 'the self' by means of an ascesis, an
'art of life.'" He shoots into their veins what could not be called
'good drugs,' but ones that obliterate the subject, leaving only
obsessive repetitions of the impulses to stimulate nerve endings.
Coughing and then moaning, the twin pigs cry out, "'Self' is not a
personal identity so much as it is a relation of reflexivity, a relation
of the human subject to itself in its power and its freedom. " 32
Marcel shoves Tim forward. He urges Tim into domination postures, and
snaps latex gloves on his white hands. Marble white and leather black, a
masked version of the empathic, equivocal Bernini angel, arrow in hand,
sending St. Teresa into ecstasy, Tim shimmers in the light playing on
his lubricated youthful muscles, his masculine energy rising to the
rhythms of Marcel's rough power
Together, they drive the men, now sobbing and vocalizing their fearful
rapture, to greasy black leather slings. At Marcel's instigation, Tim
utters these hypnotic words: "You have no identity here. You are only
vessels for pleasur。 something which passes from one person to
another. It is not secreted by identity."
Marcel speaks oracular words as his hands move in profound violation of
nature's fundament: "I don't think that this movement of sexual
practices has anything to do with the disclosure or the uncovering of
S/M tendencies deep within our unconscious, and so on. I think that S/M
is much more than that; it's the real creation of new possibilities of
pleasure, which people had no idea about previously. The idea that S/M
is related to a deep violence, that S/M practice is a way of liberating
this violence, this aggression, is stupi。I think it's a kind of
creation, a creative enterprise, which has as one of its main features
what I call the desexualization [i.e, the 'degenitalization'] of
pleasure. The idea that bodily pleasure should always come from sexual
pleasure, and the idea that sexual pleasure is the root of all our
possible pleasure--I think that's something quite wrong."
Tim hears Marcel saying, "This is our century's only 'brand new'
contribution to the sexual armamentarium. The 19th C invented myriad
species of perverse sexual desire, but virtually nothing new in the way
of sexual pleasure had been created for millenni。 We delve and
ravage 'the self' by hand because 'the self is a new strategic
possibilit。 not because it is the seat of our personality but
because it is the point of entry of the personal into history.' We
perform 'the crucial work of rupture, of social and psychological
disintegration, that may be necessary to permit new forms of life to
come into being. but there is no guarantee that they will come into
bein。 '"
Over and over through the shadows of night the jarheads, recumbent like
Caravaggio's St. Paul on the roadway or St. Francis receiving stigmata,
grunt their bodily assent to transcendence in pleasure
Volunteers 2004:
A New Year's Grasping for the Politics and Jouissance of
Jefferson Airplane's Volunteers, released Nov(?)
1969: Grace Slick, Paul Kantner, Marty Balin, Jorma Kaukonen, Spencer
Dryden, Jack Casady
We Might Be Together
A few of us were together. We had almost-completely lovely times with
our young bodies together ejaculating enough to clear the major toxins
(leaving what were, after all, only subsidiary poisons of sexual
deviation and guilt felt by some who were out of phase with cosmic
duality of sex vision), , although we went out/in on long and fulfilling
trips together. We had gone to places so sublime that difference was
irrelevant--to us at least. We also yearned to be together with the
racial Other. We could have been together. Then, we would have thought
we recognized each other together.
The Intellectual Origins
The thought was that repression of natural impulses was a reification
of the restriction to bare necessities for labor under capitalist
relations of production. At first we noticed that abundance (not
necessarily personal abundance, although the post-WWII/Cold War takeoff
of the US economy afforded better living for much higher proportions of
the US population) was not satisfying to us, although it seemed to be
sufficient for our parents who had suffered serious deprivation during
the Depression and then horrifying war (our fathers ignorant men thrown
together in foreign lands to face death with only each other's bodies
for support--while longing for the comfort of love and habit sent by the
women who became our mothers in letters to unknowable islands and
bivouacs). Our dads came home, moved into nuclear family houses, farther
from their parents, aunts, uncles, etc than ever before, tried to live
with rectitude and diligence amid rising prices and elevated standards
of liveable housekeeping, tried to be husbands and fathers to
uncomprehending wives and children. No wonder so many became alcoholic
and silent, no wonder so many women secretly suffocated in those
single-family units.
Children's first exposure was to Dr. Spock's kindly strictures to feed
on schedule, an agonizing commitment for parents who heard their babies'
cries as echoes of their own childish deprivations and wanted to provide
better for their offspring. The moms and dads capitulated to a makeshift
of indulgence and vaccination, hoping for clean, healthy children who
read Dick and Jane as if they were true.
As we children of the baby boom grew older we had more free time than
any previous generation on earth, free time to undergo the tidal waves
of adolescent hormones and to read Catcher in the Rye and even On the
Road in study halls, although we also memorized Pledges of Allegiance,
Declarations of Independence and believed them.
Then televisions began to show us vibrant Black children singing their
way to jail for "freedom," and revealed a whole other America that
wasn't privileged and purposeless. We were electrified by the
righteousness of their new Black way and the brutality of the old
segregationist intransigience.
We were educated by American Bandstand to the rigors of Cold War
dating, and those of us who couldn't get dates understood that we were
inadequate. Our salvation came from the post-colonial British, from the
Beatles who were able to repackage Black American music to our
ill-formed tastes and make us happy with dancing that did not require
touching. The Beatles neat appearance belied their snotty, grotty
sarcastic resistance to the parts of life we agreed were uncool. And the
Rolling Stones were better than greasers, almost evil but British so
they couldn't beat us up.
So many of us escaped to college. We suddenly found friends who did not
think we were inadequate, or at least we shared inadequacy and fumbled
for relief from restrictions of our behavior. We read and we shared,
Revolver and Bob Dylan, and we began to grow hair, to smoke pot and to
trip. Trips were dangerous explorations of cosmic reality, and they were
serious, only occasionally joyous, but so revelatory as to be precious
signposts of the fulfillment we thought we lacked. In the swirling
hallucinations we also felt the reality of our own bodies, sweating,
breathing, ingesting, eliminating, fucking--thrilling. And yet the world
was going wrong.
A list of what prepared for 1969-1970
The Bible
Lincoln's speeches
Grapes of Wrath
Leaves of Grass
Great Expectations
Another Country
poems of Wordsworth, then Keats
Songs of Innocence, Songs of Experience
Walden
The Way of Zen
The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter
Pilgrim's Progress
Giovanni's Room
Ten Days That Shook the World
Irrational Man
The Stranger
Black Boy
The Immoralist
Siddhartha
Naked Lunch
Vietnamese dispatches explaining imperialism and People's War
Battle of Algiers
Bonnie and Clyde
Midnight Cowboy
Lonesome Cowboys
Inauguration of the Pleasure Dome
Howl
The Wretched of the Earth
Huckleberry Finn
The Second Sex
Treasure Island
Winnie-the-Pooh
The Tibetan Book of the Dead
Eisenhower's farewell speech
Kennedy's inaugural
The Assassinations
Ond-Dimensional Man
I and Thou
God In Search of Man
The Power Elite
Autobiography of Malcolm X
Mao's "On Contradiction" and "Combat Liberalism"
What Is To Be Done?
Democracy in America
Port Huron Statement
The Symposium
Chicago Seed, East Village Other, SF Oracle, Berkeley Barb
Paradise Now
The Cockettes
We were opposed--violently. Someone fantasized Armed Love--even a
poster about the hippie mother and baby, the freak father with a rifle.
We should be together, if only we could, the longing for uniting, the
revulsion at how untogether our world was, the push to overthrow, the
inability to tolerate our pain, our own pain--given to us through the
unprincipled and unprecedented wealth of this empire, We had never been
denied before; we called for an end to the obvious sickeningly
conspicuous waste, shrieking injustice of prejudice against the Blacks,
who were beautiful and sexy and mild. Our confusion when this bad was
not remedied was relieved through the Communist Manifesto, made
immediate and then strategic by the Vietnamese and Che, but still
uneducated and heedless regarding our close-to-home contradictions of
women's oppression and sexualities.
The Songs33
We Can Be Together
We are all outlaws in the eyes of America
In order to survive we steal cheat lie forge fred hide and deal
We are obscene lawless hideous dangerous dirty violent and young
But we should be together
Come on all you people standing around
Our life's too fine to let it die and
We can be together
All your private property is
Target for your enemy
Dangerous, obscene, hideous, dirty, violent and young? We are not quite
proud of ourselves. A hymn to us, an anthem to tearing down the walls we
felt between ourselves, while we were aware but daunted by those walls
within ourselves. Could our trips together lead us out of the brutality
of wealth, consumerism,? Could, should it be war?
Good Shepherd
And then a step back, recusitating of Christian imagery, good shepherd,
though walking through the valley of the shadow of death (the shadow,
not the death) what could we be hoping for from the son of god.
handsome, generous, a cross to the other shore?
One for to make my heart rejoice
Can't you hear my lambs a-callin
Oh good shepherd
Feed my sheep
Stay away from the bad people, and the guns.
The risking of arrogance in preaching
the risking of irony, the risk of meaning, really meaning, it.
The Farm
Soaring, twanging, milk and cows and honey, way out in the country. Oh
so good, granola and soy, cold and damp in winter, sunny and fog-free in
summer--oh, late summer golden hills, a little dope if you could, living
on the farm, male and female striving
Hey Fredrick
Way out there, you have a choice--usually--to let it be high or higher.
Your contradictory humanness, body of blood, brain basket, coursing
organs, a voice trying to break through to you, to you in your personal
ears, crackles of sublime interference intercourse and guitar notes too
complicated their screaming simplicity, electronic fuzz,
Loving eyes look down on you
Sheets and a pillow
How old will you have to be before you
Stop believing
That those eyes will look down on you
That way forever
nobody wants to boogie, only to sit awestruck by the single notes, the
ones that carry through the six realms of beings to being it goes on to
mere hallucination
Turn My Life Down
A man asks you to look into his eyes, his borrowed moments. can he give
me moments, can I give him his, oh no, he is not for me, but by
miraculous means he is here for me, turning me down,
When I see you next time round look into my eyes
Where we'd be never could decide
Borrowed moments they cannot fill the moments of our lives
And wishful thinking leaves me no place to hide
but so wounded that his turning down is turning towards him, nothing to
say becdause he is a man among men and women, not my kind (a man among
women and men) no place to hide
Wooden Ships
And then the hawsers creak and the wind is so strong and capable of
carrying us over to the other side, everybody smiles in the same
language . Who won? Let the good win, even if they won't take me Wont
they take me? There are a few of us, aren't there? We are not post-yet
and the berries will keep us both alive on this simple wooden platform,
on these very free and easy winds, leaving you to sail toward the sun
(taking off at night so as not to burn) Do I have to take a sister,
can't I take a brother? Power of leaving, watch all the past die, you
don't need us. Does the fleet need me, can I go? What if I'm found out?
The way it's supposed to be, very free,, no--no, no-no; no, no, no--go
ride the music
Very free
And gone
NO C'MON
GO RIDE THE MUSIC
C'MON RIDE IT CHILD
Eskimo Blue Day
moving it changes its name and its game, but doesn't mean shit to that
magnificent tree spreading across the eyescreen, eel swimmer fantastic,
love electric glimmer, and those pecking, noodling, fingers mumbling
into me, can this pleasure be taken me taken do I have strength to dance
when I am alone, surrounded by the assumptions, the natural thing, but
irony makes a slim space for me, in redwood
If you don't mind heat in your river and
Fork tongue talking from me
Swim like an eel fantastic snake
Take my love when it's free
Electric feel with me
You call it loud
But the human crowd
Doesn't mean shit to a tree
entering the stream, too much cold in one place breaks, it's here in
the trees. Is it me?
A Song for All Seasons
that country twang so dangerous, so hideously hellish, ironic again,
materialistic, not to be believed as oracular
I guess your life just ain't really that complete
You know your car with which I was impressed
Well I hear that it's gonna be repossessed
Well I thought you had it made
But you ain't even paid
For the things that you've bought
Since the acid test
disregard those reality aspects
Meadowlands
Back to the fantasy of soviet power, collectivist nostalgia: if only
they could have crystallized the revolutionary moment, but if only they
can aid the Vietnamese, we can defeat US imperialism.
Volunteers
Bass necessary for revolution, gotta revolution, VOA a thrift store on
mission
Hey I'm dancing down the streets
Got a revolution Got to revolution
Ain't it amazing all the people I meet
Got a revolution Got to revolution
One generation got old
One generation got soul
This generation got no destination to hold
Pick up the cry
Hey now it's time for you and me.
Weather Report
"People ask, what is the nature of the revolution that we talk about.
Who will it be made by, and for, and what are its goals and strategy?. Thus the loss of China and Cuba and the loss now of Vietnam not
only encourages other oppressed peoples (such as the blacks) by showing
what the alternative is and that it can be won, but also costs the
imperialists billions of dollars which they then have to take out of the
oppression of these other people。
The legitimacy of the State is called into question for the first time
in at least 30 years, and the anti-authoritarianism which characterizes
the youth rebellion turns into rejection of the State, a refusal to be
socialized into American societ。
The crisis in imperialism has brought about a breakdown in b bourgeois
social forms, culture and ideology. The family falls apart, kids leave
home, women begin to break out of traditional "female" and "mother"
role。"34
16
Achmed's Backstory
In 1948, as war clouds darkened the deserts, Abra Maslow was at Petra,
"Rose-Red City of Biblical Edom35," with an
archeological team, measuring the girth and length of the columns of
sandstone carved into the living rock by the Natabeans.
Abra was the daughter of the brilliant psychiatrist Abraham Maslow, who
worshiped the motherless girl--some said he set her on a pyramid above
all the rest of womanhood. Her education was a strange one, based in
Maslow's reading of the life of John Stuart Mill. Abra read Heraclitus
in Greek and Lucretius in Latin by age five, and besides her father's
German and English, she also was versed in pre-Mohammedan Arabic. Not
content with degrees in Pythagorean geometry and Khwarizmi algebra,36Abra was also a famous hostess and cook. Her salon
and her parties at the Dakota during the war years attracted Ruth
Benedict, Margaret Mead and Tallulah Bankhead, uncorking fine vintages
and feasting on Abra's speciality, an international ratatouille of
whole-roasted zucchini, Japanese eggplant and spicy Italian sausages
alla putana37, later copied by Alice Waters for Chez
Panisse.
One fateful day in the blazing sun, Abra was stretching around one of
the colossal stones with a tape measure seeking the Nabateans idols of
the sun god Dushara, whose symbol was an uncut black stone. (Allat, the
great mother goddess of Arabia, was his mother and consort.) All over
Petra she had opened carved niches containing pillars or large separate
monoliths representing Dushara. She was in front of the Treasury
[Khazneh] when a troop of Bedouins came thundering up picturesquely on
their sleek Arabian steeds. Their muskets firing, the Bedouins
surrounded Abra and sent her native helpers scurrying into the dust.
She, fearing for her life but resolute, rose and turned to face the
crowd of swarthy men. The tallest--sensually dark and handsome--
dismounted and came in her direction, seizing her by the hand and
wrapping his other arm around her waist. A scream was forced from her
lips as they were pressed against the firm mouth and bulging chest of
this man with magnetic dark eyes. In an instant, Abra was swept away, a
captive of the Sheikh.
Making from Petra for the Wadi Arabah, the Sheikh's band had a stiff
climb down, unloading and loading the horses and pack mules where the
trail between rock cliffs was too narrow to let them pass. There at Wadi
Musa, where the rock finally opened, these wild knights of the desert
paused and pitched their tents, while the erotic dancing girls undulated
rhythmically. As they cooled their palates and ate their dates, the
Sheikh's men knew they could not be followed, as they were the masters
of their desert domain.
An international incident ensued; the British Protectorate was forced
to divert a key unit of men from Jerusalem to search for Abra, thereby
leaving the King David Hotel unprotected. But that first night, Abra
faced her captor alone on the moonlit desert. She was carried into his
tent and bathed by three maidens who scented her hair with jasmine, then
draped her in rich silks. She was thrown onto a divan covered in
priceless rugs, right into the arms of the young Sheikh, now abluted and
smelling of powerful, sweet musk--although there was also an
intoxicating aroma of horse and sweat lingering at his thighs.
Still determined not to collapse in fear, Abra sat up and said in
archaic Arabic, "Honorable host, please treat this guest with the
courtesies traditionally vouchsafed to strangers."
His eyes widening, a smile brightening his sensual lips, the Sheik
answered her in Oxbridge English, "You will be treated better than if
you were a mere stranger. Remember how receptive to strangers they were
at Sodom, which lies buried only a few leagues from here. Now I will
have a kiss!"
Abra, feeling it was more strategic not to resist too much, tried to
turn away, but his exotic honeyed tongue darted between her lips before
she was prepared. "Ohhh, please," she moaned. "Be gentle."
The Sheikh emitted a low musical laugh and replied, "I am always gentle
and always savage. In this case, however, since you are an agent of
international petroleum prospectors, you do not deserve much gentleness
in this our desert land." He pulled her roughly toward him and, grasping
her wrists, extended her body across the soft rugs and lay atop her.
"I am a scientist and a virtuous woman," Abra cried in Natabean, but
her cries went unheeded as the moon and its caravan of stars crossed the
blue desert.
。 ."
Less than a year later, the Sheikh proudly held up Achmed ben
Maslow-Sheikh, his beautiful son, and named him his heir, commanding all
the tribes of Bedouins to swear fealty and loyalty to him forever. As
they swore their oaths, the baby's mother shot her violator, the father
of her child, through the heart and was consequently set upon and
butchered by the loyal Bedouins. Achmed, however, grew to manhood,
(shortening his name to ben Maas), went to Oxford like his father, and
--hurrying along this story-- became the chief accountant for Phillips
Petroleum. He married the delicate daughter of a Greek tycoon and they
had four sons and--the deglet noor of his eye--a daughter, Oedipa.
Raised in historic Baghdad, the urban center of the most sophisticated
Islamic country in the world, Oedipa outdistanced her girlfriends, and
especially her brothers, in all games and in learning. Particularly fond
of riding and polo, Oedipa was furious when at thirteen she was no
longer permitted on the team. She grew rebellious, flirted with the
Baathists but left them quickly, and was soon the leader of the
transnational smarty set of oil-rich sons and daughters who outraged
their parents with their sexual license and intellectual probing. Oedipa
smouldered, knowing she must achieve self-actualization.
At fifteen, after an incident at the Iraq Desert Country Day School
where she was nearly violated by a US Army Baptist chaplain, Oedipa ran
away to Jerusalem and became a dedicated revolutionary, had brief and
fiery affairs with Edward Said and Leila Khaled, escaped to California,
and joined the Wymmyn's Fyre Brygade, an anti-imperialist collective in
Encino. It was from there she helped Tania to run from the bullets, and
where she began her Transition, taking testosterone and pumping iron,
surgically molding breasts into hard pecs. By age thirty, he was Achmed,
an anti-imperialist like his grandfather, a Marxist Muslim, fighting
global capitalism and sexual oppression around the world. Hated by
fundamentalists, feared by global capitalists, Achmed worked in
clandestinity, supporting himself as a sex worker, male or female, as
the revolutionary situation demanded.
Petra and Petroleum
Petra sat at the crossroad of two major ancient routes, the King's
Highway and the Incense Route. It was these routes which were fought
over so violently between Solomon and the Edomites. The wealth gained in
their control was fantastic, as witness the stories told of Solomon's
Temple, etc. Its first written history is found in the Hebrew Bible; for
the land about it was Mount Seir of old (now Esh Sera), home of the
Horites, cave dwellers whose progenitor was Hori, the grandson of Seir
(Gen.36:20). These Horites are first mentioned at the time of Abraham in
connection with the subjugation of the land by Chedorlaomer. King
Amaziah of Judah made war against the children of Seir and took Selah
(Petra? see argument above), smiting ten thousand. "And other ten
thousand left alive did the children of Judah carry away captive, and
brought them unto the top of the rock, and cast them down from the top
of the rock, that they all were broken in pieces" (2Chron. 25: 12).
Could this "top of the rock" have been Umm el Biyara? The debate
continue to rage.
We know that Crusader King Baldwin I constructed at Petra a castle
called Selah, the Bible name for Petra (2Ki.14:7). He was following the
old idea of controlling and taking toll from the caravan routes, money
being his prime objective in the Crusade. Though Crusaders constructed a
fort there in the 12th century, they soon withdrew, leaving Petra to the
local people. The city died out of men's memory, and the nomads used it
as a hideout, living in the nearby caves, for a thousand years.
17
Poolside
"A beautiful morning," says Mr. Sithole to Cyril and Vyvyan, stuffing a
newspaper behind his back. He calls them over to introduce a young man
in an International Male pool lounging outfit.
"Mr Burst and Lord Throbbing, this is Mr. Tilden; he's learning
bartending and hotel service. Tim, please help these gentlemen get
comfortable at poolside."
"Quelle convenance," flutes Cyril.
"Handsome Timmy," fifes Vyvyan as the three head toward the pool.
"Have a pleasant day, milords," says the Manager oilily, shoving Timmy
after them.
Cyril oboes, "Down at the far end, away from the Casino. It's quieter."
Baring their leathery skin to the sun, Cyril and Vyvyan settle on
chaises longues, inviting Tim Tilden to join them. He sits between them
on a towel and pulls off his shirt, revealing a Hellenic marble chest
upholstered in white wool.
"How are you gentlemen enjoying the summer? What brings you to this
godforsaken shack?" He picks thoughtlessly at a scab on his nipple.
Vyvyan replies, "Oh, it's too cold down in Namibia where we live. And
we're always traveling anyway--it's our work. And you? Aren't you
American?
"African American," says Tim. "I've lived here since I was twelve years
old. See, Mrs. Sithole brought me here from Hollywood 'cause I was an
orphan. My mom was in the movies and my great-great uncle was almost
President; he won the popular vote in the highly-disputed Tilden-Hayes
election of 1877. He was defeated in the House by radical
reconstructionists, which was a good thing. I'm going to study film this
year."
"Oh, everyone will be so proud of you, young man,' Vyvyan tells him.
Just then, a stricken policewoman rushes by carrying a scorched baby
with a bottle clenched in its mouth.
"Oh, the poor child!" gushes Cyril. "I must see what I can do." Pulling
on his shirt, he dashes toward the front of the hotel.
"Cyril has such a generous heart," Vyvyan sighs lovingly. "God knows
he's kept me all these years. And I was an orphan too, from the Blitz!"
"You were? I guess he can afford it."
Vyvyan gaily retorts, "Oh, we live on nothing--eat like two old birds.
Cyril got fantastically rich selling gentlemen's jimmys--AIDS, you know.
But all the money--750 million pounds--went into the Burst-Throbbing
Foundation for Wayward Boys and Girls. The BTF rescues sex-variant
children all over the worl。 Well, mostly Africa and the Middle
East."
"Another Disney operation?" Tim sneeringly asks.
"Oh no, dear, we're not Disney at all. We're the anti-Disne. A
Phalan。 Sunblock?"
"Uh, thanks. I need it."
As Vyvyan lubricates Tim's alabaster muscles, he exclaims, "What
entrancing eyes! You have eyes like a Siberian Husky; underneath the red
they are ice blue."
"Yeah, I guess it's the albinism."
Cyril bustles back to say "My stars, Vyv. That baby was nearly
electrocuted in the Casino. They're searching for its mother now."
"Oh Cyril, you're very flushed. Sit under the shade. Here, take a
valium and calm down."
"Um, can I have one too?" asks Tim as winningly as he can. "Maybe you
two would like to relax upstairs with a massage? I'd better get out of
the sun."
"Speak up, dear boy--Cyril and I are both deaf as post。 Ohh, no
thank you. We're meeting a nice musical artist here for lunch."
18
Mobe and the Old Boys: A Whiter Shade of Pale
"Hello Uncle Vyvyan," said Mobe 68. "You look beautiful in the sun."
"Oh, you dear boy! Sit here beside me. Ferdie, you sit there next to
Cyril so he can feel you up. No sense fiddling with Mobie, who still
thinks he's 'jam38'."
" Hi, Cyril. How are you, love?" asked Mobe, kissing his uncles on both
cheeks. "I'm so happy to be here and not in Ubud. We got out just before
the summer Hindu surfers arrived."
"What are you reading, Ferdie dear?" Cyril asked him. "Would you boys
like a drink? Vyvyan, call Achmed over. Mobius, we have wonderful news!
We just ran into your Aunt Karen!"
"Ugh! Please don't tell her I'm here yet, Cyril. I can't take another
session with the photo albums. Ferd, you better go to the desk and leave
her a message."
"That's right, love. And we need a few minutes tete a tete with Mobe.
Be a dear and tell Achmed we'll have a Svack before lunch--the round
bottle, tell him. And watercress sandwiches for four?"
As Ferd walked away, Cyril bent nearer his nephew to say, "We have two
exciting assignments for you! We've been so busy! Caprice, our old
friend, is the cook here. Her spies have put us in communication with a
Malian woman who wants to prevent her 11-year old niece from receiving
FGM."
"FGM? We've never intervened in FGM. We don't impose our values, Uncle
Cyril."
"But in this case we will, dear. The girl has a reputation for being
too mannish, and her mother and father are dead set on female genital
mutilation; it is going to be part of an initiation rite, accompanied by
explicit teaching about the girl's role in her particular Kenyan
society," Vyvyan shudders. "Apparently, the mother said, 'We are
circumcised and insist on circumcising our daughters so that there is no
mixing between male and femal. . An uncircumcised woman is put to shame
by her husband, who calls her "you with the clitoris". People say she is
like a man. Her organ would prick the ma. .' "
Cyril adds, "The family is rich, they live in Nairobi, but they are
said to be in despair over their daughter's 'perverted sex drive.' They
had decided to forgo the ritual when the girl was eight, but no。
This mutilation procedure will be performed by a qualified doctor in
hospital under local or general anaesthetic--very humane, they claim.39"
"What do you want me to do, then?"
"We have the cleverest plan, dear. You will impersonate a surgeon, fake
the procedure, and bring the girl and her mother here to Caprice to
'recuperate.' Then Caprice and her family will go to work convincing the
mother the girl is better off being herself. Isn't that a scream!"
"OK, if you want it done, then it's done. Why didn't you want Ferd to
hear about it? He's cool. And he'll have to make the arrangements."
"We don't know him as you do, Mobe dear. We trust your judgment. Here
he is, and here's dear Achmed with the luncheon."
"I left the message," Ferd reports. "Countess Karen is apparently
meeting with WTO security people right now, but will be available later.
What did I miss?"
"I'll give you the details later, " says Mobe. "Now let's eat. We want
to hear about assignment two."
"A queer case, boys," Vyvyan archly says. "In Denmark, there's a
seventeen-year-old boy who is being forced into a gay marriage. The
child is gay, but he doesn't want to be married. His lover's parents,
who are Americans from New Hampstead。"
"New Hampshire。"
"New Hampshire, then,". Cyril sighs. Who knew it would come to this?
I miss the old days when we musical types were merely sinful. Now the
American gay people are so dreary. And liberal parents。 Oh!"
"The poor boy," says Vyvyan, gumming his watercress. "Read a little
from your book, Ferdie. I loved Heraclitus at school. And no, I never
met him!"
Ferd reads,
"It is not good for men to get what they want."B10
"To be self-controlled is the greatest excellence. And wisdom is
speaking the truth and acting in knowledge in accordance with nature."
B112
The world, the same for all, neither any god nor any man made, but it
was always and is and will be, fire ever-living." B30
Marcus Aurelius' Meditations (VI,ii,17.2)quotes: "so Heraclitus, I
think, says that even those who are asleep are workers and
fellow-workers in the events of the world."
"Just like us, Cyril, says Vyvyan lovingly. "After lunch let's take a
nice nap. Read on, it's so stimulating, Ferd--even in English."
Plato quotes Heraclitus saying。 "every thing moves and nothing
rests; you would not step twice into the same river." Cratylus 402A
"We are and we are not.
"The path up and the path down are one and the same, constant, ever
changing.
Disease makes health
pleasant and good,
hunger satiety,
weariness rest. B114
"Combination--wholes and not-wholes, concurring differing, concordant
discordant, from all things one and from one all things." B1040
19
Merle the Compassionate Bodhisattva
Merle the Maltese lifts his leg to the Joshua Tree.
"May this water bring health to all beings."
In gratitude, the tree leaves rub pathetically. It is very old for a
transplanted tree,
struggling to maintain its life in a climate that is too cold and wet,
then too hot and dry. It is patient in the morning sun. It tells Merle
"The existence of reciprocal relationships of things implies that each
tree--like me-- existing in nature makes some contribution to what the
universe as a whole is, a contribution that cannot be reduced
completely, perfectly and unconditionally, to the effects of any
specific set or sets of other things--lie dogs-- with which I--as a
tree-- am in reciprocal interconnection. And, vice versa, this also
means evidently that no given thing can have a complete autonomy in its
mode of being, since its basic characteristics must depend on its
relationships with other things. The notion of a thing is thus seen to
be an abstraction, in which it is conceptually separated from its
infinite background and substructure. Actually, however, a thing does
not and could not exist apart from the context from which it has thus
been conceptually abstracted. And therefore the world is not made by
putting together the various "things" in it, but rather, these things
are only approximately what we find on analysis in certain contexts and
under suitable conditions "41
Merle is not merely sentient, he is sapient: he has had many previous
lives, beginning as a dung beetle in Gandhara, at the monastery where
Jesus studied Theravada Buddhism. Most recently, a human healer with the
Carnivale who, offered complete absorption into the infinite, was so
filled with compassion that he returned to Earth as a dog. Merel's
entirely legitimate, but unregistered offspring include Laika, the
beautiful spacedog of Sputnik II, Petrasche (Dog of Flanders
immortalized in the eponymous Disney film) and Mr. Peabody and his boy
Sherman.42
Not so many years ago, after undergoing an ecstatic epiphany upon
lapping up water at Lourdes, Merle was baptized by the saintly but
controversial Cardinal Pirelli. As he progressed through the realms of
karma, he has worked all his lives to ease suffering. He listens to the
tree.
Old elm that murmured in our chimney top
The sweetest anthem autumn ever made
And into mellow whispering calms would drop
When showers fell on thy many coloured shade
And when dark tempests mimic thunder made -
While darkness came as it would strangle light
With the black tempest of a winter night
That rocked thee like a cradle in thy root -
How did I love to hear the winds upbraid
Thy strength without - while all within was mute.
It seasoned comfort to our hearts' desire,
We felt that kind protection like a friend
And edged our chairs up closer to the fire,
Enjoying comfort that was never penned.
Old favourite tree, thou'st seen time's changes lower,
Though change till now did never injure thee;
For time beheld thee as her sacred dower
And nature claimed thee her domestic tree.
Storms came and shook thee many a weary hour,
Yet stedfast to thy home thy roots have been;
Summers of thirst parched round thy homely bower
Till earth grew iron - still thy leaves were green.
The children sought thee in thy summer shade
And made their playhouse rings of stick and stone;
The mavis sang and felt himself alone
While in thy leaves his early nest was made,
And I did feel his happiness mine own,
Nought heeding that our friendship was betrayed,
Friend not inanimate - though stocks and stones
There are, and many formed of flesh and bones.
Thou owned a language by which hearts are stirred
Deeper than by a feeling clothed in word,
And speakest now what's known of every tongue,
Language of pity and the force of wrong.。
- Such was thy ruin, music-making elm;
The right of freedom was to injure thine:
As thou wert served, so would they overwhelm
In freedom's name the little that is mine.43
As he caninely muses about inter-being, he is startled by a policewoman
running toward the pool and the front, carrying a baby in her arms.
He says to himself, "I can tell that extinction nears for that child is
near. I remember the teaching of the Enlightened One in the Kevatta (Kevaddha) Sutta:44
(The Passing Away & Re-appearance of Beings)
'With his mind thus concentrated, purified, and bright, unblemished,
free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady, and attained to
imperturbability, he directs and inclines it to knowledge of the passing
away and re-appearance of beings. He sees -- by means of the divine eye,
purified and surpassing the human -- beings passing away and
re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and superior,
beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their
kamma: 'These beings -- who were endowed with bad conduct of body,
speech, and mind, who reviled the noble ones, held wrong views and
undertook actions under the influence of wrong views -- with the
break-up of the body, after death, have re-appeared in the plane of
deprivation, the bad destination, the lower realms, in hell. But these
beings -- who were endowed with good conduct of body, speech, and mind,
who did not revile the noble ones, who held right views and undertook
actions under the influence of right views -- with the break-up of the
body, after death, have re-appeared in the good destinations, in the
heavenly world.' Thus -- by means of the divine eye, purified and
surpassing the human -- he sees beings passing away and re-appearing,
and he discerns how they are inferior and superior, beautiful and ugly,
fortunate and unfortunate in accordance with their kamma. Just as if
there were a tall building in the central square [of a town], and a man
with good eyesight standing on top of it were to see people entering a
house, leaving it, walking along the street, and sitting in the central
square. The thought would occur to him, 'These people are entering a
house, leaving it, walking along the streets, and sitting in the central
square.' In the same way -- with his mind thus concentrated, purified,
and bright, unblemished, free from defects, pliant, malleable, steady,
and attained to imperturbability -- the monk directs and inclines it to
knowledge of the passing away and re-appearance of beings. He sees -- by
means of the divine eye, purified and surpassing the human -- beings
passing away and re-appearing, and he discerns how they are inferior and
superior, beautiful and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate in accordance
with their kamm. . This, too, is called the miracle of instruction.'"
Knowing he is needed, Mere follows the nurse.
20 Burn
Irritated at the disappearance of her Maltese, Countess
Yousoupoff-Blitzen is perhaps too caustic to Oliver South; she virtually
slaps his face with a news clipping. "What is this? Are we allowing
amateurs to burn our assets now? Find these anarchists and eliminate
them. Read this:"
Intersex Demonstration Blasts a Message
PARIS, Sept. 13, 2003 Figaro-Pravda
A small band of intersex activists rallied in front of the Disney
School of Surgical Enhancement and Body Design on Friday, September 13,
2003 to protest a gender revision surgical procedure scheduled for an
unidentified infant. 
The 'Total Urogenital Sinus Surgical Procedure' was to be observed by
participants of a 'Feminizing Genitoplasty and Total Urogenital
Mobilization' seminar presented by the hospital. with associated surgery
by Dr. Dirck Diink of the Finno-Ugric University School of Medicine. 
Approximately two dozen people picketed the hospital in a peaceful
effort to draw attention to what they perceive as nonconsensual genital
mutilation.  Several protestors were intersexed people whose surgery as
children resulted in assignment to the wrong gender.  Approximately
twenty minutes before the procedure was to begin, a bomb went off in the
empty surgical theater.
The combined bombing and picketing efforts paid off.  Not only did Dr.
Diink cancel his appearance, but the hospital also invited talks by
adult survivors of early childhood surgery intended to assign an infant
to one gender or the other.  Several of the protestors were intersexed
people whose surgery as children resulted in assignment to the "wrong"
gender. 
"This action by queer, transgender and intersex
activists loudly demonstrates our collective outrage at what is
occurring in hospitals around the country five times a day to
non-consenting children We acted to show the lies in the twisting of
"Sexual Orientation" and "Gender Identity and/or Expression,"
Medicalization of Anatomy, and the insistence of society to place
people in the binary sex model, wherein a man is a man and expresses
masculine characteristics, while a woman is a woman and expresses
feminine characteristics, and their sexual dichotomy exists for
procreation. This model goes to the core oppression of the entire
LGBTIQ community, whether one is Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,
Transgender, Intersex, Queer, or Questioning. "
 unsigned communique
21Tim and Ana K.
Poolside talk about orphans has Timmy a little upset. "I shouldn't have
bragged about my relatives," he thinks. "Nobody cares about who I am
related to." Tim doesn't know how wrong he is. Cyril and Vyvyan care
enough to have secretly financed Tim's emancipation from California
Child and Family Services and brought him to Mrs. Sithole. Their B-T
Foundation has liberated thousands of young gay, lesbian, transgender,
intersex kids and created new lives for them. Timmy, a long way from the
Hollywood Napkin Ring, has luckily forgotten much of his life on the
Boulevards and the men who were kind to him only to get him in the back
seat of a car. "The Sitholes are cool ," he is relieved to say almost
every day. But now he's looking for his new friend, a nice but sleazy
girl who's visiting her mom here. "She'll be in the Casino still. But
that baby looked like。"
Tim breaks into a run, beginning to realize something might be really
wrong. He can't figure out what the baby would be doing running loose,
getting hurt maybe. Skidding into the bar, he nearly collides with a
Black-suited man.
"Hey, you, kid! Stop right there. What are you doing here?
"I work here, well sometimes. My uncle is the manager."
"OK, then. " The Black suit changes his voice to a friendlier, much
friendlier tone. "OK, then. Tell me what you know about a baby. Were you
here a couple hours ago?" He already knows the kid was behind the bar in
the late afternoon.
"Yeah. If it was the same one, there was a baby here. A girl was with
her, like blonde hair, a little high. Where is she? Did something happen
to her?"
"There's no girl here," says Black suit, his hand closing around Tim's
elbow, "unless you mean those kids over at the video games."
Tim pulls himself free and runs over to question two longhaired kids
playing Survival of the Fittest. "Lo。 Franky. ou est la fille
qui etait ici avec le bebe? Pense! Franky, que'est que ce que vu?
"Ici? Rien. Ne vu pas rien! Laissez que nous juissons le video. Laissez
nous en paix!"
"Nothing, they were too zoned out to see anything," Tim tells the man
in black. "I gotta find her."
"We've got a lot more to worry about, ki.  By now that baby may be
dead. It might be a kidnap thing. You look around for this girl if you
think she knows something. And come report to me before you leave."
Tim moves erratically around the casino, finding no trace except a used
Pamper and a Minnie bag. He heads for the bathrooms, waits impatiently
for a woman to come along to check the Dames. When no one goes in or
out, he pushes the door open and walks in, bending to look in the
stalls. There! A pair of jeans pulled down over fancy Pumas. It's her!
"Oh, god," he sighs. "I just met up with her. She was all 'you're so
white, cute, let's hook up.'. Now she's all blue。 and。
dead. Police! Help!"
22 Emergency Ward: Burn Trauma: Panopticonvict
From this point of view, Rusche and Kirchheimer { Punishment and Social Structures, 1939, ed.} relate the
different systems of punishment with the systems of production within
which they operate: thus, 。] the penitentiary…forced labour and the
prison factory appear with the development of the mercantile economy.
But the industrial system requires a free market in labour and, in the
nineteenth century, the role of forced labour in the mechanisms of
punishment diminishes accordingly and 'corrective' detention takes its
place. [. ] Every offense now carries within it, as a legitimate
suspicion, but also as a right that may be claimed, the hyupothesis of
insanity, in any case of anomaly.45
"Electrocution!" screams the EMT. "Oxygenate her, she has possible
brain complications."
In comes the harried ER doctor. "Where's next of kin? We have to deal
with the burns now, let the brain alone."
In comes the nurse. "Poor baby! At least she's not a suicide like that
Korean.46"
In comes a State official with an alligator purse. "We need to keep
this baby under surveillance. She may be a crime victim. This child may
be the victim of parental abuse, and we must interrogate her mother."
"What makes you think this child even has a mother?" sneers the doctor.
"I'm disgusted with your system that lets women drop babies like
laundry."
"Call the psychiatrist, 47 " says the alligator
official. "Watch this baby!"
Novy enters running, demanding to know, "What are you doing to our
baby? I'm a mother.". Snuffling toward the bed comes Merle, his eye-hair
standing up to clear his vision.
Novy punches the only speed-dial number on her cel. "Mona, honey, it's
me. I've got bad news. You need to come to Mickey's EuroDisney Emergency
right now. It's the baby." She hangs up to screaming on the other end.
The phone rings as Novy leans over the baby. "Try, little girl--try to
live!" she gulps, not crying.
Mere the Maltese runs barking around the room. " I will have to
contravene natural processes of death here. This calls for the Atanatiya
ritual,48a healing ceremony that primarily belongs
to folk religion; it has become a ceremony purporting to fulfill, at the
popular level, the socio-religious needs of the simple rural Buddhists.
. I will have to utilize the primitive but colourful dances, gestures
and prayers that a refined Buddhism might disdain. In this incarnation I
am European- (and obedience-) trained; why, I can understand the Texaco
Metropolitan Opera broadcasts without the obstacle of English
translations, so my dharma would normally more resemble that of the ch'an."
"In this crisis," he thinks, "with Mona Lisa and the baby, we can posit
that the child has need for tovil--exorcism of
evil influences. The Buddha is the chief of living beings, who include
the yakkhas and other related non-human beings
that figure in tovil. Although they have the
power to make their victims ill in various ways -- such as by
possession, gaze, etc. -- they have to leave them once propitiatory
offerings of food, drink, etc., are made to them. Even the mere mention
of the Buddha's virtues is enough to frighten them. Moreover, the chief
of the yakkhas, Vessavana (Vesamuni), is one of the four regents of the universe (maharaja) and as such a devoted follower of the
Buddha. The ordinary yakkhas that trouble human
beings have to obey his commands. Thus, in all rituals connected with
tovil, it is in the name of the Buddha and
Vessavana that the yakkhas are commanded to obey
the orders of the exorcist. And in the rich folklore that deals with tovil, there are many anecdotes that connect every
ritual or character with some Buddha of the past or with some Buddhist
deity."
Into the room comes Timmy, staggering with the murdered Ana K. in his
arms. Behind him is MonaLisa, her eyes pleading for surcease of sorrow.
"Detenez ces femmes--criminelles, Magdalenes, putains-- la," dit le
oficiel avec le sac de alligateur.
And coming down the corridor are Oliver South and his black-suited men,
briefcases at the ready.
The Atanatiya Ritual
Merle yips the growing crowd into silence. He knows that first one must
recite the Metta, Dhajagga, and Ratana Suttas. He does so. "We will
dispense with the armed guard and getting the patient to offer me a seat
and go directly to the paritta, the offering of
flowers and lamps to the dagaba, and the
recitation by the bhikkhu (me) of a set of benedictory stanzas, called
(Maha)-mangala-gatha.[24] "
He summons a full assembly of the deities. Then, he barks out orders to
the evil spirit to say his name.
"I am the devil in the details," is heard coming from the blue lips of
the baby.
The compassionate Dog tenderly licks the burned face of the baby and
tells the devil, firmly but respectfully, "the merits of offering
incense, flowers, alms, etc. are all transferred to you; the mangala-gatha just referred to have been recited in
order to appease you (pannaharatthaya: as a gift)
and you should therefore leave the patient in deference to the Sangha
(bhikkhusangha-garavena)."
This is the dangerous point, as Merle knows well. If the spirit still
refuses to leave, the deities must be informed of his obstinacy and the
Atanatiya Paritta will be recited after declaring that as the spirit
does not obey them, they are carrying out the order of the Buddha.49
Panting in concentration, Merle invokes the second-highest spirit of
his universe, the reader. "Dear Reader, if the spirit will not leave,
the baby will be left in a coma. Should the Author let her live, or
leave her to vegetate?"
Timmy turns toward the imagined viewers and implores us, utilizing a
perhaps-inefficacious formula, "please, let her live. Say 'I believe.'
Clap your hands!"
A clock is heard ticking, and sands run through an hourglass,
whispering suspense. The heart monitors ping ominously. Two mothers hold
each other, shrieking their fear. Sunlight pours bluely through the
regrettable Chagall windows. South mutters his expectation of a clean
merciful death for the electrically ravaged child; she is negligible
collateral, as he assumes she is already damned by the sins of her
wanton mother. He is after frying bigger fish.
Meanwhile, what is a devil to do?
And suddenly, putti appear through the ceiling, holding a laptop, and
the screen says, "You've got mail." A celestial hand reaches out to
click the verdict: What, readers, will it be?
23 Digression on Shame
"Mommy, I just love Shame."
Brandon de Wilde in the George Stevens 1953 fillm with Alan Ladd, Jack
Palance and Jean Arthur
"I like the gods. I like them very much. I know exactly how they feel.
Exactly."
Jack Palance in the Jean-Luc Godard 1963 film Contempt, with Brigitte Bardot, Fritz Lang and Michel Piccoli
George Eliot puts down her pen and sighs. Looking, as I think Virginia
Woolf said (VW might have been calling the kettle beige), like "a
sorrowful but brainy horse," she muses,
The Nineteenth Century Novel is, aside from its aspects in
verisimilitude--depiction of 'realistic' characters caught in the
contradictions of ubanising capitalism--an essay in philosophical
inquiry. Consider my Middlemarch, where
consciousness itself was examined through the minds of Dorothea,
Casaubon, Ladislaw, etc. Readers were aware, I trust, that the "stealthy
convergence of human lots" arose from genetic predisposition, social
conditions, and ideological (religious) conviction. I just wish I could
write funny stuff too.
She writes:
Dear P___,
I enjoyed reading your book, 50which provoked many
thoughts for me. If I can now remember them, I will try to write some
down.
Our brains seem to work through chemical and electrical circuits
that first register bodily impressions--whether presented from
outside through the senses or internally from nerves monitoring the
body or nerves monitoring the thought processes and memory. The mind
develops as a consciousness that our brain/body is actively involved
in the process of processing. The mind is somehow tricked into
believing that it is continuous and identical to itself, despite the
ocurrence of different sense impressions and different sentient
responses at each moment of our lives. We seem to want to believe we
are the same from day to day; hence, the creation of a "self" as a
vessel of continuity, of identity. Of course this "self" is
inflected by genetic and cultural factors: a 21st C US gay white
male self is not just biological, but historical.
This "self" comes to dominate our reception of input and processing
of reactions--feelings and thoughts. There is some speculation that
because women are subjected to much more biological change on a
periodic basis, they have less investment in the rigid maintenance
of a continuous self-identical "self." In any case, most of Western
history explains things on the basis of continuities, individual or
social, and the interruptions to continuity.
Our "self" tries to hold things together in the midst of ongoing
chaos by assuming continuities and asserting it can and must
integrate different responses to similar and even wildly divergent
processes that happen to the body and the mind. One of the ways it
asserts this attempted integration is to believe the individual
thoughts that pass through our minds (scientists concerned with
thoughts and consciousness say a thought passes through in around 20
seconds, and that a new one occurs at least as often) are connected
to each other, although they are not--in fact--connected by anything
except the assertion of their connectedness.
I take from this the conclusion that a desire to integrate
different impressions, feelings, or impulses into a self is based on
an illusory belief that it is even possible, and therefore that the
attempt to integrate is always a failure. That failure results in a
feeling of inadequacy that is the genetic consequence of the fact
that our brains are too sophisticated for our own good. An
individual human feels inadequacy (basic shame) not because he/she
isn't as good as others, but because no human is capable of
integrating what is not integrate-able.
Nor is any human capable of reconciling autonomy vs doubt of her
capabilities, love vs hate, like vs dislike, or any other thing we
see as dichotomous, bifurcated, opposite--because binaries are also
inadequate to contain the complex variability of situations and lead
to rigid distinctions about what is inside and what is outside, what
is good and what is bad, what is functional and what is
dysfunctional.
Human society functions through the confusion of our connections
and disconnections with others and ourselves, pretending we are
individual identities and creating power networks that pervade every
distinction.
Sexuality is one of the confusing connections/disconnections that
is infused with power and powerlessness, and is--like all other
processes--actually not composed of self and other, in and out, good
and bad, creative and destructive, because these binaries are
inadequate but just about as far as our brains can go with the
delusions of continuity and self-identity.
20th-21st C gay men in the US inherit American culture and struggle
with it, burdened like all other humans, with the delusion that it
is possible to integrate impossibly divergent feelings, impressions,
impulses, into a coherent "self." Since we can't, we feel shame.
Others feel shame too, but our shame is inscribed with the
dichotomies and hierarchies of masculine power in our own particular
gay male way, as constructed by the social processes (gender, class,
race, geographic accident) of the last several centuries.
So, why not decide that shame is inevitable, that everyone feels it
in her/his own body, and that therefore it is not useful to do
anything with it except ilaugh at it and move on. We ignore the fact
that we can't fly: we don't feel shame at not being able to overcome
gravity. We do invent airplanes and banana peel jokes. We also
invent philosophies, psychologies and religions that help transcend
the blame and depression that are reactions to the inadequacy of the
human brain. We even invent anti-depressants, most of which are
pretty crude at this stage.
Wild sex is one of the incommensurable feelings, bodily and social
processes that sometimes breaks through the rigidities of "self" and
allows us the relief of a dis-integration, of non-identity. It can't
last, because our mind/body cannot continue without the assertion of
identity. Ecstasy means (from Greek) outside the self.
But nothing we have invented can overcome the basic problem that we
can't integrate un-integrate-able differences; we want wild sex and
we want domestic comfort. They can be made to coexist, but they
can't be made into one stable thing. The recent history of gay sex,
through sexual experimentation to the search for transcendence and
blowing our minds to AIDS to post-AIDS ennui and depression is, I
think, evidence of our biological and social limitations.
Two 20th C gay white American men were talking together. One asked
the other, "Do you smoke after intercourse?" The other replied, "I
don't know, I've never looked."
The Other is, of course, non-identical, different from me and
different from itself. We all think poop smells, but each of us
thinks our own poop actually smells pretty ok. We like its
familiarity, and hope it is the same every time. We like
sameness--men particularly like sameness, and they seek to be the
same all the time. They also like other men because they are the
same, familiar to the senses. It is possible for a man to imagine
how another man feels pooping, sweating, running, eating, laughing,
being hurt, being afraid. Since he seeks to integrate his
contradictory impulses, he looks to other men for help and for
models of how to do that.
Woman must more clearly notice she is different every minute, and
markedly different through the month. Man looks to woman to be
different, and cannot imagine integrating her except by inserting
himself into her--fearfully entering into something different, with
different smells and textures, unsure he is safe. Unsure whether he
is doing the right thing or inflicting harm, he tells himself this
is the natural thing to do, although he would feel more secure if
she was familiar like Daddy and not mysterious like Mommy. Male
supremacy may be just homophobia--fear of same, not fear of
homos--an misinterpretation of the safety of sameness into a demand
for difference, an insistence on integration by inserting himself
into Other, ruling her, it.
If this were the case, our shame, the mind's conclusion that the
biological incapacity of the mind to reconcile contradictory
thoughts and feelings is to be interpreted as failure and inadequacy
qua humanness, when in fact each human faces the same incapacity and
deems her/himself a failure, may be inscribed in our "culture" as
our desire for the Other to allow us an escape from the shame of
being unable to do what humans by nature are not really able to
do--to integrate.
No blame. Perseverance furthers. The superior man (sic) thinks it's a
cosmic joke.
Yours truly,
Mary Ann
P.S. Don't worry about gay/lesbian/bisexual/transgender/intersex/queer
marriage. Worry about Gavin Newsom's record on housing and the homeless.
GW Bush realizes that calling for a Constitutional amendment is only a
dumbshow: it won't be passed by 37 1/2 states. And the NY Times is
editorializing (3/8/04) that same-sex (sic) marriage is inevitable.
P.P.S. Bluto, Goofy, Grouchy and Bozo were voiced by the same man,
Pinto Colvig. What does that say for verisimilitude in the animated
film, which is the only direct descendant of the late Novel as
narrative.
24
Grand Ballroom: Mlle. DisneyWorld-Adjacent
Tonight: Competition for the Crown
As flames licked at every tree in the unexpected heat of late October,
the Pageant of the World's Most Up-to-Date (DW-A) was staged on
specially-artificed sheets of ice, with scintillating snowflakes falling
intermittently to be-dew the faces of the beautiful contestants.
Mlle. Corporate Flight
Hails from Canton, Ohio, USA.
 
(Much-edited) LA Times
In the last three years, Stark County, OH, which includes Canton, has
lost 3,500 factory jobs, more than 10 percent of the total. Two years
ago in Massillon, just west ofCanton, the lone rubber glove factory in
the nation shut, moving production to Malaysia and India and throwing
her father out of work. Last year, Hess Management of Austin,Tex., shut
the Danner Press printing plant, costing 325 workers their jobs, and 700
steelworkers at Republic Technologies on the east end of town lost their
jobs when Republic filed for bankruptcy.
Thomas Briatico, president of Hoover Floorcare, based in North Canton,
said all of Hoover's major competitors but one were buying their vacuum
cleaners from Asia and Mexico. That foreign competition, Mr. Briatico
said, has forced theaverage retail price of cleaners to drop 10 percent
in two years.
"It's put us at a little bit of a competitive disadvantage," he said.
"In China, they pay their workers 55 cents an hour, and the easiest
decision for me would be to go outsource in China. The tough decision is
to stay here. I'm personally concerned about jobs leaving this country."
"The truth is unless we can do something with these plants, they won't
be globally competitive," said Mr. Timken, who recently stepped down as
chairman of the National Association of Manufacturers.
Mr. Timken said his company had been hurt by the strong dollar, China's
undervalued currency and the harm that imports were causing his
customers. Foreign competition was so intense, he said, that the price
of manufacturing goods
in the United States has fallen 4 percent in the last 10 years as the
price of other goods has increased 18 percent. That, he said, has forced
Timken and other manufacturers to increase productivity and reduce jobs.
Mlle. Gray Market
A pretty SE Asian miss from Indonesia, her headscarf made of velvet,
burned into see-through floral patterns.
NYT September 26, 2003 (Partly) by MARK LANDLER
Hang around any schoolyard in Germany or college campus in Indonesia
and it becomes clear that the recording industry's problems with the
illegal online distribution of music in the United States pale beside
the rampant piracy that goes on overseas.
The industry's biggest hurdle may be cultural. As is the case among
many young people in the United States, swapping files and burning
tracks on CD's are viewed in most countries as routine, not renegade,
behavior. After all, the most popular file-sharing software, KaZaA, was
dreamed up by a Swede and written by three young Estonians.
"I adored Leslie Cheung, but if he made 5 million or 2 million a year
doesn't matter to me, honestly speaking," said our contestant, referring
to the late gay Taiwanese pop star whose songs are actively swapped over
the Internet.
Piracy, of course, affects more than a pop star's paycheck. Sales of
recorded music have plunged more steeply in several European and Asian
countries than in the United States because of a combination of file
sharing, home CD burning and the mass production of knock-off disks. In
Germany, Europe's largest and hardest-hit market, sales have fallen by a
third in the last five years. They are projected to decline another 20
percent this year, compared with a 12 percent first-half decline in the
United States.
These examples leave out China, where piracy exists on an entirely
different scale. Nine out of 10 recordings in China are pirated,
according to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry,
an umbrella group
for 46 national industry organizations.
File sharing appears to be as cross- cultural as any other type of
piracy. The amount of swapping in a country generally correlates to the
number of people who have PC's with high-speed Internet connections.
That case will be no easier to make in Berlin or Bombay than it is in
Boston. Consider the crowded store hidden between the curry stands and
photocopying shops at Trisakti University in Jakarta, Indonesia.
A sign outside advertises "Recordings! Your Favorite Songs in Cassette
& CD Finished in 3-7 days." Inside, Miss GM and other students
peddle "special" CD's for 12,500 Indonesian rupiah each (about $1.50). A
legitimate CD bought in Jakarta's business district would cost six times
that.
For a little extra, customers can name 15 to 19 songs, and the shop
will burn them on to a CD. Hip-hop and rhythm and blues are the most
popular requests, and if the shop does not already have the song, no
problem. Tonight's pageant compeitor's boyfriend ,Ferbie, will
personally download it from the Internet at his father's office. "The
customer is king," he said.
Mlle. Illegal Market
Bella hija de la familia Londoño, de Bogotá, Colombia
NYT September 18, 2003
By JUAN FORERO (con unos cambios en redaccion)
BOGOTÁ, Colombia, Sept. 17 - The United Nations said today that
American-financed aerial eradication of Colombia's vast coca fields is
starting to pay big dividends and released estimates that show the size
of the crop dropping by 32 percent in the first seven months of the
year.
Production of coca - the main ingredient in cocaine - is increasing
slightly in Peru and Bolivia. But the sizable reduction in Colombia's
crop means that for the first time overall coca production in the Andes
is dropping at a rapid pace.
The new estimates from the United Nations Drug Control Program show
that coca fields in Colombia fell to 170,430 acres on July 31 from
251,940 acres last December. At this rate, the United Nations said,
Colombia's coca crop will be reduced 50 percent by the end of the year.
The American Congress is debating whether to provide another $700
million in aid to Colombia on top of $2.5 billion that Washington has
spent since 2000 to eradicate coca and undercut the financing source for
Colombia's insurgent groups.
Human rights groups frequently criticize President Álvaro Uribe, uncle
of tonight's contestant, and some American congressmen have questioned
the effectiveness of United States aid. The new data, though, are sure
to encourage supporters of eradication. "Many people who thought this
couldn't be done in the past are having to rethink their assumptions,"
John Walters, the White House drug policy chief, said by phone from
Washington.
Unlike his predecessors, Mr. Uribe in his 13 months in office has
allowed American planners to use spray planes whenever and wherever they
have seen fit.
Mr. Londoño, in charge of Colombia's drug policy, also attributed the
decline in coca production to a fall in cocaine consumption in the
United States.
According to the Department of Health and Human Services, occasional
users dropped to three million in 2000 from six million in 1988, with a
concomitant rise in retail prices.
"The question is whether this will be sustainable," Srta. Londoño said,
sniffing audibly. 
To be continued。
25 Grand Ballroom, cont'd.
As Mlle. NP skates onto the stage, the Countess hisses to Ollie, "Just
look at this. The little peasant that killed theCancun talks along with
himself. You've got to prevent these thing.  But all the agriculture
ministers left after that suicide. We need to get at the roots of
dissent. We can no longer count on AIDS alone to clear out the excess
farm labor pool already. Read this! It's his daughter!"
Mlle Native Produce
Farming Is Korean's Life and He Ends It in Despair
NYTimes, September 16, 2003 By JAMES BROOKE
JANGSU, South Korea, Sept. 15 - Before Lee Kyung Hae left for Cancún on
his final mission to defend South Korean farmers, he climbed a hill
behind his old apple orchard here. In the quiet solitude of his former
farm, he cleaned up around his wife's tomb.
The big news out of Cancún this week was the breakdown in the World
Trade Organization talks, as the developing nations walked out in
frustration over farm subsidies. To most of the world, Mr. Lee's act may
have seemed like a sideshow, the latest face of extreme antiglobalist
protest,perhaps, just a final desperate measure by a disturbed ma。
Mlle. African Immigrant (1st or 2nd generation)
Cyril and Vyvyan flash their passes backstage. They call over Mobe, who
is to perform tonight. Handing him a black briefcase, Cyril whispers to
him, "We're leaving tonight, dear. Things are getting too hot for us
here. We have a flight to Kuala Lumpur. We'll stop over in Dubai; the
Emir is lending us a palace for a couple nights. God knows he's gotten
enough diamonds through us."
"Ugh," says Vyvyan, "don't say through. So messy it was. But you get to
safety as soon as you are finished here."
The pair hug their nephew and hand a coded note to Caprice Sithole, who
nods her understanding. The Sitholes are rooting for Mlle. AI, who came
from Tanzania with her brothers and sisters. Her home village had been
an experimental Fair Trade cooperative, just beginning to succeed in
reversing the Green Revolution fertilizer problem, until her mother, the
village head, and her aunt, the chief agronomist, died.
Agence France-Presse
June 30 2003
The AIDS epidemic is threatening farm output and, in turn, many people
in Africa who are vulnerable to poverty and hunger, according to United
Nations officials quoted in this article. "The majority of African
countries worst-hit by HIV/AIDS are also those heavily reliant on
agriculture," said one such official.
This article indicates that about 30 million of the 42 million people
with HIV/AIDS live in sub-Saharan Africa, over half of them in rural
areas. Last year, 5 million more people were infected with the virus,
most of them living in low-income, food-deficit countries. In most of
southern Africa, up to 80% of the population depends on small-scale
agriculture for food and livelihood. The Joint United Nations Program on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) issued a report on HIV/AIDS in partnership with the UN
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), which said AIDS had killed 7
million agricultural workers since 1985 in the 25 worst-hit African
countries. The epidemic could kill 16 million more by 2020. "
"Where farmers and their families fall sick, they cultivate less land
and shift to less labour-intensive and less nutritious crops,
agricultural productivity decreases and hunger and malnutrition are on
the rise. Many children are losing their parents before learning how to
farm, to prepare food and to fend for themselve. ."
Mlle. Developed-Nation Aristocracy of Labor Unemployment
As Factory Jobs Disappear, Workers Have Few Options
NYT September 13, 2003 By STEVEN GREENHOUSE 2.7 million manufacturing
jobs lost nationwide in those three years, many of them because of
imports. Some economists say that even with a boom all those jobs are
not likely to return.
Factory unemployment has snowballed into a huge social and political
issue across the Midwest, after manufacturing in the region boomed in
the 1990's. President Bush gave a speech about manufacturing losses on
Labor Day in Ohio, and the Democratic presidential candidates are
pressing the issue. A wide range of figures suggests that the economy is
likely to surge, but economists predict unemployment will remain almost
unchanged at nearly 6 percent through the US 2004 presidential election.
Since existence creates consciousness, Mlle campaigns on the slogan,
"The fabric of this society is falling apart."
The Winner: Mlle. DisneyWorld Adjacent: Mlle. Prion
In a fetching cowgirl evening dress, the winner weeps tears of joy and
triumph, which spread among the luminary crowd.
Mad Cow Disease (BSE) is thought to be caused by a mysterious organic
formation called a Prion. Prions are infectious agents which (almost
certainly) do not have a nucleic acid genome. It seems that a protein
alone is the infectious agent. The infectious agent has been called a
prion. A prion has been defined as "small proteinaceous infectious
particles which resist inactivation by procedures that modify nucleic
acids". The discovery that proteins alone can transmit an infectious
disease has come as a considerable surprise to the scientific community.
Prion diseases are often called spongiform encephalopathies because of
the post mortem appearance of the brain with large vacuoles in the
cortex and cerebellum. Probably most mammalian species develop these
diseases. Humans are also susceptible to several prion diseases:
from Alan J. Cann, Principles of Molecular
Virology, 3rd ed. NY: Academic Press, A Harcourt Scjence and
Technology Company 1992
26 Leaving the Hotel
"The start of terror we can hardly bear51"
The Hotel Real Desert is in an uproar. Mr. Sithole has just been told
by Achmed that he has an emergency and must leave for the South today.
Mr. Throbbing and Lord Vyvyan Burst are on the way to Dubai52. All the guests seems to be checking out at once,
even the long-time resident, Herr Rheinfahrt.
To make matters worse, the black suits are after Timmy and Marcel, and
the suite of offices he rents to a casting company is being boxed up and
vacated before his eyes.
"Yes, we are relocating," says the harried casting director. "We supply
the reality extras for big news shows, and we have to get to Haiti
immediately. Glancing at a printout in his hand, he tells his assistant,
"Forget about the Iraqi women in black! We need sixty drunken soldiers,
drooling rum and shooting, two children to eviscerate, dogs to run and
bark, and a couple hundred sans cullotes to run before the cameras in
Gonaives at 5:30 tonight. CNN is already contracted for another twenty
roadside bodies outside Port-au-Prince. Keep up, you fool! Not you, Mr.
Sithole, I apologize but this is business. Our parent company, World
Security Operations, insists." Turning away, he shouts into a phone,
"No, the suicide bombing is off until Thursday. The woman won't go until
her father gets the cash for his operation."
Between Ourselves53
We were talking, about the space
between our selves,
and S___ asked you
as we eased past a car in greasy flames
on the Autobahn in the dark,
"Is love the purpose
of life?"
He reads German lit.
And you said, "There is no purpose. It's just an accident."
You lied, didn't You?
S___, blue, blue and golden, muscular youth,
virus teeming through his body, young enough to be your son.
He says he's never even fallen
in love, and maybe he should, he could.
And You said "Life goes on, within you and without you."
 
The mystery exits and sharp, dangerous turns,
a growing taste for transfiguration, obliteration of self.
S___ loves Mahler, undoubtedly Strauss.
Heldenleben:
Oh, to be really strong, to be present.
And You said we could just fuck calmly, in Sein and Zeit.
27 Escape to Languedoc
Lemmy and Achmed escape, flying south to Montpellier, an aspiring
tourist center of 250,000 souls busily aestheticizing their decayed
industrial and viniculture infrastructure. Rendez-vousing with
undisclosed colleagues at the Musee Fabre, they are spirited into the
Jardin des Plantes, where they spend three weeks installed in an exhibit
of tableaux vivants representing stages of regional history, changing
costumes every day (homme de tautavel (sic), greques/romaines, alamanii,
saracens, huguenots, etc.
Lumiere e Son de Histoire de Languedoc54
* 450,000 ans. AC L'homme Tautavel a vécu à côté de Languedoc dans
Rousillon.
Des traces de la préhistoire ont été trouvées dans Languedoc
32,500-1500 ans AC les restes des bâtiments, des tombeaux et des
objets
façonnés indiquent le développement de la civilisation moderne
Interruption of a Different Reality
All cold
Gog feel cold
snow outside
wind blow all
dark in cave
All afraid
Gog afraid cave bear
cave protect all
Gog pray on belly
pray paint hand
red hand on cave wall again again again
hand pretty
hand powerful
Gog feel Magog here
Magog hand pretty
Magog pretty Gog pretty
Smell Magog good Magog smell good
All pray Goddess
All eat Goddess food
Paint Goddess dark center
cave dark Goddess dark pray
All pray dark
Fire light warm All
no cave bear
pray pray pray pray
Gog body sing
Gog sing body All sing body Goddess
Goddess sing Gog
All love
Gog love
Gog paint
Gog transported
to another consciousness through the ecstatic chanting, where the
sound enables All to transcend their fear and experience their wonder
at being.
Gog lack words
Gog let children tell better
"As do All adults, Gog envisions our People-those few hundred people
he is certain are People-in communion, through the Goddess, with all
the other beings, inhabiting rocks that break in useful shapes, water
that cleans and cools, animals that give themselves to the people out
of respect and necessity.
The children speak better as they socialize more securely. The
children confront the changing world around them:
"We All are relieved to lay aside our fight-or-flight reflexes and to
commemorate our births from out of the dark centers of the women, to
feel the complexity of our love and frustration with each other, to
stretch our cognition to encompass the thoughts of every entity we
know."
Gog read newspaper left by Fred:
Star of One Million Years BC Joins Local Artists in Cave
Project
Flintstone Times (The All News That's Fit to
Print), March 22, 30,004 BC
Gog and a few dexterous others draw and paint the animals that
inhabit their psychic universe, here at Grotte d'Chauvet in the future
France, 30,000 years ago-before Altamira, 15,000 years before Lascaux.
They fashion tools and fashion pictorial representations with
perspective, use of pigment for line, shading, juxtaposition of images
in complicated interactions and with both sympathetic magic and
delight in the world and their own skill. Raquel Welch, the future
film star of a film on our distant past, will honor Gog and other All
artists at a ceremony at Chauvet Cave.
(Contrary to rumor, Miss Welch will not be joined by Joan Crawford,
on location nearby filming Son of
Trog. This film has awakened much controversy
among local shamans, who denounce it as "blasphemous:. Only the
Goddess has sons. This Trog, character should be shown worshiping Joan
Crawford." Brendan Fraser, "hunk" star of Encino
Man, is also unavailable.)
Our community, All, is the winner of the Great Cave Communities award
for 30,002. Miss Welch will present the award. We are sophisticated
modern humans, able to learn and teach, conscious of our talents,
trained by the environment to emphasize the overcoming of
interpersonal frictions and cooperate. Perhaps there is some genetic
memory of the bonobos we are related to, those great apes whose
species, unlike their closest relatives the arboreal chimps, are
terrestrial enough to relax and enjoy food and sex, without the
environmental pressure for male hierarchies of domination. (see
sidebar on production of art)
from: Production and Art, by Leo
Stoneberg, Ph.D., Oxbone Univ.
We, the All, speak and make tools beautifully. All do not merely
"produce," as in productive labor; All are fully modern but have not
had to distinguish the infrastructural "labor" of acquiring and
cooking food from the superstructural "leisure" of talking after
eating or "ritual" of singing. It would be mistaken to see the life of
All through the (Marxist) Western lens of "the production of the
material necessity of life," since All linvest our prodigious
cognitive and emotive skills in everything we do, and have developed
complex society in which connections to each other and to the rest of
the world are felt very strongly-more strongly-felt through community
than through individual sensoria. Living is not easy for All: glaciers
and the dangers of the hunt narrow our world; but All's painters,
singers and dancers express and symbolize our cognitions in complex
somatic, verbal and plastic form. It is important to note that All
artists are not "representing" reality; as Gog says, "All dance in
trance. Send Gog to look and mark. Gog paint allow animal to emerge
from rock live with All."
Gog enjoy primary (limbic) consciousness, like eat, sleep, fuck,
trance
Gog experience secondary (cerebral) consciousness as difficult, like
plan, don't like make anxious or regretful
In her award presentation, Miss Welch states,
"For All, the cerebral cortex is a (relatively) newly-evolved toolset
without an owner's manual, and its habit of focusing attention on the
processes of feeling and cognition has brought in train the dis-ease
of narrating, stitching transitory sense impressions and feelings into
coherent but sometimes worrisome speculations on causation. Gog, like
the others, has a legitimate fear of cave bears and cave tigers. But
All tend to over-interpret dark as fearful, mentally narrating the
fear threaded with memories of past attacks and predictions of
possible future pain that may obscure the core brain state of
efficiently living in the present.
This tendency in the darkness of life is brightened by a voluntary
surrender to the shared ecstasy of safety and worship of fecundity,
envisioned in the shape of woman-as-Goddess. Since evidence of the
need for X and Y chromosomes is invisible to them, All experience
sexual contact without deducing its role in reproduction or imposing
the standard of reproduction on the sexual activity. All, like the
bonobos, have sex with same and other-gender partners. All see that
children are born from the bodies of women. Their groups might be as
matrifocal as bonobos' as well."
Gog and Magog responsible for children Gag, Kag, Zag , Ig, Lig, Tig,
Mog, Pog, Wog, Magug, Matug, Mawug: the future of Allkind.
28 But Deep in Holiness
To: The Story Continues。
From: Trzz@aliens.net
O4-11-29,004 BC
Dear TSC,
Your description of Gog and Magog was noted here. Some of the views
(fictionalized, I assume, by the author) were inaccurate. Please see
the following actual quotations from individuals in the Chauvet Cave:
"My body moves to the singing and drumming, the bone flutes, the holy
waters shared, the bodies all around me in the resonating chamber of
the cave." M, 44
"I come to a mental/bodily state where I embrace all of us as one,
where our people feel special and right, where I and each one of us is
full of light and power." F, 32
"Jagged crackles of flashes around our heads, our insides chanting
audibly right out through our skins" F, 19
"A mute non-explosion when an aperture dilates in the cave wall,
admitting us to the other part of the world, the part where all is
alive, all we see, hear, touch, taste, smell, lift, set down, pound or
caress" M, 17
"Our dead live with us in here, happily" F, 51
"All we remember and all we forgot is here before us, the deer and
other meat, the bear and tiger to whom we are meat, the plants and
water and rock look at us with recognition, welcome us, dotted lines
of light, of power shoot from everything into me, from me into
everything" M, 28
"Power of light
Power of sound
Powers of beings revealing their being to our eyes and ears
I am not afraid of this power and the beings are not afraid of me"
(gender uncertain), 30
"I can be in the darkness with light sweating out of my body,
droplets hiss white circles on the cave floor as I turn, as I turn
under the giant rhinos the horses rumble in the stone" F, 30
"Then absolute stillness, fires brighten, the world disappears into
light" M, 29
The above are thoughts notated by myself, Trzz, an ethnobiologist
from the region of Altair 4 (Krell people). I have spent 10,000
revolutions of Earth around its star watching these homo sapiens sapiens, I, Trzz herself, am immaterial, which
enables me/her to eavesdrop on spoken and unspoken language, taking on
such forms as lichens on cave walls, cave bear assailants on the
attack, earwax of old people exchanging formulas to ward off
decrepitude-whatever form necessary to record the descriptions the
humans generate as they experience their ritual life.
I, Trzz, believe that the humans she/I observe seek two categories of
holiness.
One is the state or process of transcendence, knowing the ultimate,
stepping out of self, through pain, ecstasy, whatever, into a feeling
of unity, wholeness, of uniting with higher levels of being. These
modes of transcendence are more or less known and knowable, and can be
correlated with the levels of brain/mind consciousness
The other category is the recognition and embrace of Immanence,
beyond epistemology, not a category of knowing, but one derived from
the logic of inner and outer, self and other.
I, Trzz note, "I reject the possible correlation of these two
categories with the sexual division of labor among humans and
ultimately with gender stereotyping. By the time of the High
Paleolithic or Neolithic cultures of these caves, societies had
evolved far beyond the basic divisions of child rearing and other
tasks. I have witnessed the fact that women provide adequately for
themselves and their children, and share the surplus, through food
gathering and hunting of small, nearby animals.
Given the consequent fact (as I have observed here in 30,000 BC) that
social structures rather than necessity selected for hunting, I
conclude that men developed hunting as a supplement, as something
helpful but not usually necessary, something to do to exercise their
brains and to take a more active role. Cooperation, and language, had
already been established through experience of gathering, sharing and
maintaining food and the health of mother-child groupings. All of
these activities could be performed with the brain of a Neanderthal,
as Trzz has observed among the Neanderthal groups who lived nearby the
sites of the more sapient cave users.
To: Trzz
From: David Lewis-Williams (dlw@witwatersrand.edu)
04-12-04
Dear Trzz,
I have seen your comments on this matter. Consider the following
propositions:
1.The opening to immanent holiness in existence could be related to
the evolution of the cerebral cortex and therefore to an unknowable
knowing performed by the complex bundling of neural pathways but
unavailable to consciousness.
2. The wonder felt at the "thusness" of everything might have its
holy origin in the processes the brain uses to monitor its own active
consciousness without transmitting them to the conscious mind.
To: All Recipients
From: Arnold Schopenhauer (arnieS@pessimism.com)
04-11-1886
"Life is a business whose returns are far from covering the cost. Let
us merely look at it; this world of constantly needy creatures who
continue for a time merely by devouring one another, pass their
existence in anxiety and want, and often endure terrible affliction,
until they fall at last into the arms of death."
"If the world were a paradise of luxury and ease, men would either
die of boredom or kill themselve。 If children were brought into
the world by an act of pure reason alone, would the human race
continue to exist? Would not a man rather have so much sympathy with
the coming generation as to spare it the borden of existence?"
from "On the Sufferings of the World," in Complete
Essays of Schopenhauer.
In the world outside this fiction, the Author remembers a sacred
statement tattooed on the arm of Cory Roberts-Auli (d. 1994?) , in
Sanskrit, probably of Hindu origin:
"Oh, beautiful one, do not withhold from me that which makes you:
blood, worms, germs, flesh, phlegm, foul-smelling excretions, urine,
sperm, feces and bone and everything that makes you what you are and
will eventually turn to dust."
While reading the above, Umberto Eco calls Ferd Eggan.
"Hello, Ferd Eggan? Umberto Eco here. Fine, fine. How are the balls?
Let's repeat the dialogue of my characters in Foucault's Pendulum (1988). I will be Lia, you be Casaubon
(and yes, I did name him after Middlemarch.)
C(FE):"The one true answer?"
L(UE)"Of course. That there's nothing to understand. Synarchy is
God."
C: "God?"
L: "Yes. Mankind can't endure the thought that the world was born by
chance, by mistake, just because four brainless atoms bumped into one
another on a slippery highway. So a cosmic plot has to be found-God,
angels, devils. Synarchy performs the same function on a lesser
scale."
C: "Then I should have told him that people put bombs on trains
because they're looking for God?"
L:" Why not?"。
FE: But Umberto Eco, be careful. Foucault's
Pendulum, (1988) will be castigated for calling on searchers
for God to put bombs on trains.
UE: Impossible! That's like saying the past creates the present, when
everybody knows it's the other way around! And anyway, God??
Puh-leeze!
29 Return to Reality 2004
Achmed and Lenny are hurtled back to the Museum tableaux.
600-50 ans AC établissement des colonies grecques
560 ans AC Établissement des règlements phéniciens
50 ans AC Commencement du métier romain
300 - 500 AC invasion par Alamans, vandales et Visigoths
476 Effondrement de l'empire romain
700 AD par les saracens
865 AD Formation de la Catalogne
900 -1300 AD Guerre intermittente ayant pour résultat des
changements de règle.
Élimination du Cathares
At this point Lemmy refuses, out of historical solidarity, to
impersonate bloody corpses of his favorite heretics. He spends his
time drunk on excellent local wines, fantasizing a very fulfilling
populist Catharism.
Lemmy imagines, but Siegfried and Joseph are on the road to Cologne,
once the center of heretical antinomianism:
"How marvelous!" sighs Herr Rheinfahrt, transported by a medieval
woodcut of the cultus of Swabian Ries. "These itinerant beghards (M)
and beguines (F) were 'immoral55.' Imagine being
accused of gorging on rich foods and guzzling fine wines in the houses
of the rich. What a life, and very subversive, walking from town to
town , spreading the word that the poor are not just future inheritors
of the Kingdom of Heaven, but they can be in it right now! Tramping
around, not worrying about how slow walking is compared to the bus or
a car."
"I'd like that," says Joseph. "And let's throw in a cult of daily
bathing-as-rebaptism, to keep the lice at bay and everyone smelling
better-all for greater imitation of the human/divine body of Christ.
And, of course, purity of soul would put them all beyond petty
medieval morality. Since the Kingdom of God can be lived in the
present, there is no need for reproduction, either. Free love!"
"Better yet, they indulge their urges in homosexual acts."
Around a campfire in the Rhineland, your friends around you. Somebody
has come into camp with a stringed instrument and is singing about
Divine Love in Provencal. You put your arms around the one you love
divinely. Your hands stray beneath the robe to the chest of your
partner.
You. I stroke your hair, your beard, your manly chest. Your scent is
strong with today's sweat and the rosemary we walked through all
afternoon. A kiss as your strong neck bends back to take my mouth, the
sliding of your tongue and the savory taste of meat and rare pepper.
Your eyes。
Your eyes. I first wanted you because of your brook-blue eyes under
black lashes, black brows, my Siberian husky man. You penetrate me
with your gaze, my body shivers even here next to the fire, as your
icicle eyes become your rampant sex in me。
Siegfried sniffles as his eyes refocus on the Autobahn. "Oh, Joseph,
to walk the mountains with the wandervogels
again. We had such good times, until the whole thing turned Nazi."
Joseph answers, in calm compassion, "Herr S., your memory is a
treasure-time you can revisit. Enjoy it for what it is, without regret
if you can."
"Ja, mein schwartz Buddha, I love you, but sometimes that advice
seems a little hard to take. I am also impressed by the ideology, the
Christology of those crazy 'Free Spirits.' Back in 1400, barely
escaped from the Black Death, in a severely depopulated Europe, they
called themselves 'poor good youths' and 'good daughters.' They
rejected the sacramental system without worrying about
excommunication. They said 'I am a poor boy or girl' instead of 'I am
a poor man or woman' to emphasize their humility (?) and spoke
impersonally: 'it is said to you' instead of 'I say to you.' They all
were 'followers (and imitators) of Christ and the Apostles,' which was
a way of indicating they disdained Church hierarchies and followed
their own collective mystical inspiration."
Meanwhile, Lemmy and Oedipa are nearing the end of their sojourn in
Montpellier.
1500 après une longue période de guerre et famine que les
Français établissent control de la region
1559 Les guerres catholiques protestantes ont fini par Edict de
Nantes accordant la liberté de culte
1666 Le canal du Midi a démarré
1875 Le phylloxera détruit toutes les vignes
1962 Rapatriement des colons algériens à Languedoc
"Speaking of heretical views, here's one," says Achmed. "Remember the
Schopenhauer line about how anyone who cares about people would think
to spare future generations of the pain of living. Let's start a
movement for negative population growth among affluent Westerners.
Let's pledge not to have children and instead to leave some room and
some oxygen for others. "
Lemmy replies, "I hear the latest trend is for wealthy gay men to
have babies with surrogate mothers, and then hire nannies to take care
of them. Why don't they just get a dog!"
"Maybe the most useful would be mass suicide in the First World, for
ecological betterment."
30 Weekee Watchee: Save Sirenia
Luckily for Lemmy and Achmed, Ollie South pursues leads indicating
that some mysterious activity is planned for Cologne, or maybe Aachen.
Taking advantage of the red herrings, A & L, boldly don the
almost ostentatiously plain, rigorously but gorgeously tailored,
soutanes of Old Catholic priests, carrying volumes of Lefebvre in
Latin, and peregrinate by train to Rome. Surely in the Holy City, they
joke Thomistically, schismatics will not be subject to an attack that
might embarrass a Pontiff who, in his dotage, leans increasingly
toward Tridentianism and Mariolatry.
Their luck runs sour when they are spotted by agents of the
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith at the bus terminal in the
Piazza del Risorgimento. They run pell mell into a café down the
street from the Post Office on Via delle Grazie. Under the gaze of the
Swiss Guards across the street, Lemmy and Achmed are hustled into the
WC and put to the question.
"We know who you are: you are atheist revolutionaries. You, Caution,
are a Jew, and Achmed, you are not even a man. Why are you playing in
Church doctrine," queries the sub-assistant inquisitor.
"We throw ourselves on your mercy," Lemmy pleads. Just when their
persecutors are about to call over a carabinero, Achmed makes a secret
sign that causes the priestly crew to relent. He points to their
crotches and mimes fellatio. After a period of speechless
contemplation in the Spanish manner, a
rodillas, L and A are absolved. Their robes are confiscated,
exchanged for long-sleeved t-shirts of the Cardinal Ratzinger Fan Club
("Putting the Smackdown on Heresy since 1981") "Ever since the Holy
Father started watching Gibson's Passion," an African priest named
Thleeanouhee begin。
"Every chance he gets," interrupts a young catechumen.
"Ever since," repeats the father with asperity, straightening his
genuinely orthodox robe, " non-canonical enthusiasm for Our Lord's
suffering is chancy. Positions that were assumed, and enjoyed, intra
muros-traditionally taken as compensation for irregularities that
should be curtained away from stool pigeoning to the secular
government-are no longer sufficient to prophylax against ex cathedra
bans.
"As far as the homosexual-ecclesiastical cabal is concerned, we
encourage your efforts to overthrow any number of non-Christian
(non-Catholic) governments; they're only temporal powers."
"Keep in mind, Texas fundamentalism is not Catholic in our view,"
asserts one of the more chatty priests."
"But we can't just let you walk around pretending to be piously in
error."
Sped under a Vatican escort to DaVinci, our heroes are dumped
unceremoniously at curbside, but only after confessing that-if they
were Catholic-they would accept Mary as an entirely human-although
stupendously blessed-mediator, the holy quickening of her womb not to
be taken as conferring any ultra-human status upon her.
After a round of cellular calls, Lemmy and Achmed shake the dust of
Rome, off on assignment in a private jet to Embry-Riddle Aeronautics
University, the notorious flying school in northern Florida where the
9-11 terrorists learned to fly but not to land. From there they are
driven to WeekeeWatchee, the tourist center with the famous Mermaids,
now a front for Sirenia, a pagan cult bent on repopulating the
Everglades with manatees.
Achmed recusitates his female performance for the sake of
revolutionary resistance to Sirenian crypto-fascism. He works three
shows daily as an underwater dancer-diver, breathing through a tube,
titted and assed as a mermaid. Through a secret channel, he is able to
swim near the manatees at Blue Springs State; as many as 80 to 100
spend the winter in the warm waters. The river at the park has a
fenced off area where manatees who have been nursed back from poor
health are kept. They would be unable to survive if they were free, a
view denied by the Sirenia group. Lemmy briefly works as a tour guide,
handing out maps and brochures.
Manatee Info for Kids <savethemanatees.org>
Manatees have one type of teeth - molars. They are the type used for
grinding and work well for the foods the manatees eat. The teeth in
front wear down as the manatee gets older. But, new teeth form in the
back of the jaw, moving forward to replace them. That tooth movement
is called the "marching molars".
Manatees are plant eaters. They feed on all sorts of sea plants. An
average manatee may eat 100-150 pounds of food each day. They swallow
sea squids or mollusks that may be attached to the seagrasses they
eat. Also, sand is often mixed with the food they eat. The gritty sand
wears down the teeth.
Brain, eyes, ears, whiskers are some of the body parts that help the
manatee sense the world. The manatee ear bones are large and their
hearing is believed to be good. They make sounds under water to "talk"
to each other. The sounds are like chirps, whistles, or squeaks. Most
of the sounds they make are too low a frequency for humans to hear.
Their eyes are small but manatees have fairly good vision. They can
tell differences between sizes of objects and different colors and
patterns. The manatee snout is covered with whiskers. They are sense
organs, but their purpose is still not clear.
It is believed that manatees are smart.
To be continued。
31 Sirenia, cont'd.
Their brain is very large and has a lot of gray matter. The gray
matter is where thinking occurs. Manatees can learn tricks. Breathing:
Although a manatee can stay under water for up to 20 minutes, it must
come up to the surface to breathe air. When the manatee reaches the
surface, you can hear the air blown out of the mouth with a big burst
of air. Poof. Then you can hear the fresh air being sucked in.
Manatees may live up to 60 years of age or more. The oldest manatee
now living is about 50 years old. Manatees have no natural enemies.
Sharks and alligators do not usually hunt them. Most premature deaths
occur from cold weather and disease. Fast-moving boats usually kill
several manatees every year.
Fossils of manatees found in Florida's springs have been estimated to
be about 45 million years old. Fossils found in other parts of the
world may be as old as 60 million years. The modern manatees evolved
from four-footed land mammals. Their closest living relative is the
elephant. (For extra credit see footnote 1.)
Sirenia is a cult with worldwide connections. Descended from certain
coastal Israelite and Canaanite groups that considered Jonah the link
between God and man, the Sirenians ultimate goal is to revert humans
to aquatic mammals. Popiel Jonah Melville XXIII, their current
AnteDiluvian (water-bearer of the prophetic seal), has initated a new
phase of the Great Work in Manistique, Michigan, where an indoor
EvergladeLand scientific center and tourist attraction is being built.
In an upcoming episode, readers will gasp at the scope of their
operations.
Cleverly averting close physical examination, Achmed successfully
begins to insinuate himself into the Sirenia inner circles. The
mermaids are grateful that an obviously well-trained athlete listens
to their aspirations and doubts with encouraging tenderness and
penetration. They are also eager to help her progress in her
transition to aqualife. After proving herself as a loyal novice with
impressive lungs, she is sent to Manistique.
Lemmy, under some suspicion after he was seen cruising on weekends
around the glory hole booths at XTC Video, in Daytona Beach, is made
part of a delegation to Kuala Lumpur to facilitate the smuggling of a
dugong to a dentist's waiting room in Marin Co.
While they are en route, we check in on Cyril and Vyvyan. Cy is
supine on the floor of the Jebel Ali Free Zone mall, having fainted
while arguing with Vyv all the way from Dubai Airport.
"Cyril," screams Vyvyan, wake up! Oh, will someone please bring some
water!"
The mall security quickly bring a portable infibulator, oxygen and
water, and Cyril swims slowly back to the light in this desert oasis.
"Ohhh," he moans, as he recognizes Vyv. "My dear, I was in a dark
grotto, like Capri, and everything smelled so astringently sea clean."
Cy and Vyv had been arguing about Cyril's obsession that others think
he smells bad. After an 11-hour flight from Paris, his rumpled mind
confused the oliferous perspiration of bodies in the Airport and Jebel
Ali with a morbid preoccupation with his own age-specific
putrefaction.
"Ever since Hard Day's Night Cyril has been washing, douching and
perfuming like Lady Macbeth," dithers Vyvyan to the fetching but
uncomprehending young guard who kneels with him at Cyril's side. "He's
bonkers about being a clean old man."
On the flight Cyril was seated next to a stellar American backpacker,
very blue-eyed and ruddy. He inhaled the delicious acrid fragrances of
the boy's armpits and crotch, with puissant bottom notes of of pee and
arse, and fretted about the leaks of gas he himself was detonating on
what he hoped was an unsuspecting planeload. Elaborately moving his
tongue in his long drowse, he fell into the reverie mentioned earlier
as his brain cells clicked on sweet scents of seawrack.
Coming Soon: Protocols of the Order Sirenia,
As transmitted through the Wandering Aramean from Petra
to Joppa
to Tarshish to Ninevah to All True Believers
The Great Work of God to Restore the Divine Order
The Book of Jonah
Moby Dick
1 Manatees, Dugong, and Sea Cow
This order of aquatic mammals contains two Recent families: Dugongidae for the genera Dugong (dugong, one species) and Hydrodamalis (Steller's sea cow, one species,
extinct); and Trichechidae for the single genus Trichechus (manatees, three species). The dugong inhabits
coastal regions in the tropical parts of the Old World, but some
individuals go into the fresh water of estuaries and up rivers.
Steller's sea cow occurred in the Bering Sea, being the only recent
member of this order adapted to cold waters. Manatees live along the
coast and in coastal rivers in the southeastern United States, Central
America, the West Indies, northern South America, and western Africa.
Sirenians are solitary, travel in pairs, or associate in groups of
three to about six individuals. Generally slow and inoffensive, they
spend all their life in the water. They are vegetarians and feed on
various water plants. They are the only mammals that have evolved to
exploit plant life in the sea margin (Anderson 1979). The ordinal name Sirenia is related to the
supposed mermaidlike nursing of dugongs (thought to be the origin of
the myths of the sirens) and manatees. The only reliable observations
of nursing in manatees, however, have revealed that the young suckle
while the mother is underwater in a horizontal position, belly
downward. P. K. Anderson (1984a) reported that suckling in the dugong is
somewhat similar but that the calf usually is in an inverted position.
The Sirenia often are classified together with the Proboscidea and
Hyracoidea in the mammalian superorder Paenungulata. The geological
range of the order Sirenia is early Eocene to Recent. The earliest
fossils are from Hungary and India. By the middle Eocene the order was
present in southeastern North America, the West Indies, southern
Europe, northern and eastern Africa, and south-central Asia, and three
distinct families--the Dugongidae, Prorastomidae, and
Protosirenidae--had evolved (Dawson and
Krishtalka 1984; Domning, Morgan, and
Ray 1982). These aquatic mammals were apparently more abundant
from the Oligocene to the Pliocene than they are now. Their
comparative scarcity at the present time probably results from
climatic changes in the Pliocene and Pleistocene and, more recently,
exploitation by humans for food, hides, and oil. The number of
individual sirenians remaining in the world, perhaps 60,000, is far
smaller than that of any other mammalian order.
 
Copyright © 1997 The Johns Hopkins University Press
32 The Baby Lives
Under orders from Bikkhu Merle, the Devil in the Details rips through
the Baby's chest and screeches away in brimstone and thunder to the
Devil Realm. Imagine the picture:56 Timmy is shown
facing the viewer, still holding the murdered Ana K. in his arms,
imploring. MonaLisa57 leans over The Baby from the
right of the bed, her hand on her daughter's little forehead, while
Novy in the foreground stares aghast at Ana K's stiff body, almost
falling out of the frame bottom right. Merle is in the foreground to
the left, bathed in Caravaggiesque off-white light. The incredulous
Doctor, Nurse and Alligator Purse, in a pictorial triangle middle
ground left, stare dumbfounded, one at The Baby, one at Merle, and the
third, the Doctor, gazes openmouthed directly into the eyes of the
viewer/reader. South and his men have left for the North.
Voice-over, the reader is asked again, "Should the Author let her
live, or leave her to vegetate?"
The putti appearing through the ceiling double-click on Mail.
From: Readers of the World (row.univ.net)
To: Author ferdeggan@earthlink.net
Date: 5/10/04 5:48:17 PM
Subject: Let Baby Live
We, the readers of the world, despite ignoring repeated calls for
comment, can now notify you that we have decided you should let The
Baby live. Please inform us of any outcome, and we may deign to
comment anew.
"Now we'll see some action," hopes Novy.
Merle gradually fades from the picture as the AP official moves
toward him.
The Doctor, alert now to his patient, exclaims, "Sacre bleu! The
Baby, whom we will now call Little Nell, lives! But her body is nearly
75% destroyed by the electrical shock. I fear only her brain is
functioning, and I cannot be certain all of that is intact."
"Thank the Goddess of Compassion Quan Yin, she didn't have time to
develop a pesky "self," comments Merle's fading bark.
Novy grasps the laptop from the putti and begins an immediate search
for a specialist. With MonaLisa at her side, she finally locates the
most prominent specialist in body transplants. A graduate of Grenada
Medical University, Dr. Sieglinde Rheinfahrt-Merdeka, has successfully
performed five cutting-edge body transplants at the Hospital de Muchas
Mercedes, Cd. de la Plata, Argentina, a charitable project of
something called the Burst-Throbbing Foundation.
33 Terror in Cologne
Lemmy imagines, but Siegfried and Joseph are on the road to Cologne,
once the center of heretical antinomianism:
"How marvelous!" sighs Herr Rheinfahrt, transported by a medieval
woodcut of the cultus of Swabian Ries. "These itinerant beghards (M)
and beguines (F) were 'immoral58.' Imagine being
accused of gorging on rich foods and guzzling fine wines in the houses
of the rich. What a life, and very subversive, walking from town to
town , spreading the word that the poor are not just future inheritors
of the Kingdom of Heaven, but they can be in it right now! Tramping
around, not worrying about how slow walking is compared to the bus or
a car."
"I'd like that," says Joseph. "And let's throw in a cult of daily
bathing-as-rebaptism, to keep the lice at bay and everyone smelling
better-all for greater imitation of the human/divine body of Christ.
And, of course, purity of soul would put them all beyond petty
medieval morality. Since the Kingdom of God can be lived in the
present, there is no need for reproduction, either. Free love!"
"Better yet, they indulge their urges in homosexual acts."
Around a campfire in the Rhineland, your friends around you. Somebody
has come into camp with a stringed instrument and is singing about
Divine Love in Provencal. You put your arms around the one you love
divinely. Your hands stray beneath the robe to the chest of your
partner.
You. I stroke your hair, your beard, your manly chest. Your scent is
strong with today's sweat and the rosemary we walked through all
afternoon. A kiss as your strong neck bends back to take my mouth, the
sliding of your tongue and the savory taste of meat and rare pepper.
Your eyes。
Your eyes. I first wanted you because of your brook-blue eyes under
black lashes, black brows, my Siberian husky man. You penetrate me
with your gaze, my body shivers even here next to the fire, as your
icicle eyes become your rampant sex in me。
Siegfried sniffles as his eyes refocus on the Autobahn. "Oh, Joseph,
to walk the mountains with the wandervogels
again. We had such good times, until the whole thing turned Nazi."
Joseph answers, in calm compassion, "Herr S., your memory is a
treasure-time you can revisit. Enjoy it for what it is, without regret
if you can."
"Ja, mein schwartz Buddha, I love you, but sometimes that advice
seems a little hard to take. I am also impressed by the ideology, the
Christology of those crazy 'Free Spirits.' Back in 1400, barely
escaped from the Black Death, in a severely depopulated Europe, they
called themselves 'poor good youths' and 'good daughters.' They
rejected the sacramental system without worrying about
excommunication. They said 'I am a poor boy or girl' instead of 'I am
a poor man or woman' to emphasize their humility (?) and spoke
impersonally: 'it is said to you' instead of 'I say to you.' They all
were 'followers (and imitators) of Christ and the Apostles,' which was
a way of indicating they disdained Church hierarchies and followed
their own collective mystical inspiration."
Missive from Merms
04/18/04
Mr. Egg (again): Your Latin is vulgar, to say the least.  Like
something you learned on your honeymoon in your hometown.  By changing
the subject from Sea Cows to vegetative infants, you missed diving
beneath the surface of Sirenia's Secret Plan: "Manatee Manors" -- the
Del Webb Everglade Retirement Community.   We, the" Wikka Daughters of
the Working Merms of Wicky Wachee Springs(ret)" corrupted your mailing
list as a warning: Stay out of shallow waters
before you are grounded.
Our Merm-mothers aren't retired, they are
permanently beached, thanks to "Sirenia" - a MAN- atee cult who
took over the Springs in the name of ecology,( actually "Human
Resources" ax- men responsible for draining the Springs and the
Everglades. ."Sirenia" is a land-use  subsidiary of Dell Webb
Developments.  And it gets worse.  More vulgar than even your Latin
could express. A landfill of human teeth is replacing 2/3 of Florida.
  The delegation to Kuala Lupur to facilitate the
smuggling of a dugong to a dentist's waiting room in Sausalito is
our symbolic clue:  The "Great Work" in Manistique, Michigan is
not just a "Marching Molars Study"
sponsored by the Fluoride Foundation of Florida, to implement dental
implant research --- it is a front for stem- cell research to
genetically combine MANatee genes with those of "land sharks"-- to
clone aquatic (cold blooded) humans who will control global
stock-markets with their sonar snout-symphonies (Disguised as dreamy
melodies of whale songs.)  If "Sirenia Systems, Inc." succeeds,
underwater investments controlled by sound-waves sent as signals by
"Homeland Security Pool and Spa Services, Inc", installed in thousands
of Florida's "active adult communities",  will drown out everything
else.  Especially poor old people.  The surplus seniors around the
world.  The drowning world.   Meanwhile, planned communities
burgeoning with groups of younger retirees will occupy Sirenia's
 upscale Florida residential enclaves,  driving out future elders, who
will be expected to work happily and harder at meeting raised
expectations--- Old age is predicted to have more positive
attributions-- such as maturity, competence, sophistication,
confidence, self-reliance and power.  Above all:  HEALTH and WEALTH.  
Surfing the Wave of Retirement:  Waving or Drowning? Growing old
successfully will be the expected norm.  Without vigorous investments
using Social Security to "grow" the Market, by
2007, Americans will ALL have inadequate financial resources.
Leisure and Medical Industries, Travel, Surgery and Adult Learning are
a few of the Market potentials directly affected.  The Song of Sirenia
is a Sea of Senior Status. Try saying that in Latin, Dr. Egg.  Now
that you know Her Secrets.  Gasp at the scope of their operations.
WDWMWWS(ret) Wichita, KA
34 Terror in Cologne2
In the crypt under the cathedral at Aachen, under torture, Siegfried
confesses:
He knew it was the anti-depressants, the SSRIs, but he couldn't
remember when he'd last enjoyed sex. He'd gotten off the plane in
Havana, was met by Dionisio, and D had taken him to bed as soon as
they got to 's casa particular. Dionisio, rubusto in his piel de canela, rubbed his
penis against him, kissing deep as he could, and S masturbated himself
to orgasm, feeling embarrassed at how long it took and how his
descending balls were thrown around by the rapid and almost-painful
flying grip. That was more than a year ago and he'd only jerked off a
few times since. He was occasionally surprised by spacetime warps of
desire. And what had love felt like?
"Keep him awake all night," Ollie growls. "He's going to give up all
of it!"
As he thought about it now, he thought his sexual appetite had never
lasted more than about fifteen minutes at a time. He'd had that
fifteen minutes with a thousand men, but that had been about it-what
satisfied him, as well as he could remember.
The sex he first had was with himself. R___ G___ had taught him to
jack off around age 13 and he'd refused to 69 with Ricky T___ and that
other kid V___ because he didn't like the smell of V's crotch. Now, he
confessed, the smell was his own. He had grown increasingly concerned
about his own smell, worried about whether his gas leaks and pissy
underwear offended others, as he was certain the tobacco odors of 2
packs per day did.
"Try stripping him and leaving him in a cold shower for a
while-that'll get him singing," says the man in black.
He'd always had a boyish way that drew stronger protective types.
He'd enjoyed that so much that he'd never learned to be anybody else.
He'd always been drawn himself to the iron-willed drag queen Tanye and
others who were boldly exotic. They were badges he would put on to
make himself authentic/. Years of criticism and self-criticism had
made him more adept at the presentation of a self as sympathetic
friend to women, to Blacks and Latinos. He took seriously the
generosity with which Others (especially Black women) granted him the
right to exist. Race and position in a hierarchy of gender/sexuality
had always been the most important markers in his sexual adventures.
He was glad he'd had them but anxious when he asked-or was
asked-whether he had any authentic self of his own.
"We're not sure this old guy has any authentic self of his own,"
reported the junior black-suit to Ollie South. "He's telling us a
great deal, but his guilt is hard to prove."
"Never mind the proof, that's for sissies and appeals courts," South
tells the interrogators. "Just keep him talking. Try the drugs."
He knew by now the question had to be answered with a yes; after all,
he did choose within the limitations of history and genetics. And he
also knew the question and its answer taken together were a trap,
sucking him into an illusory comparison of selves, reifying an idea
that did him no good, and could only add to all the negative feelings
of deficiency he confused himself with. He knew there is no authentic
self, as there is no God, as ther is no deep reality, as Niels Bohr
used to tell him.l But it was hard work to remember there is no
authentic, and his political comrades and their revolutionary project
had helped keep all that at only barking distance. He couldn't
remember anymore what it was like to love anyone, let alone love the
people.
"His consciousness is clearly shattered under the yage," South was certain. "Now for the sodomizing
humiliations."
He wasn't sure he could remember how people talk to each other. He
was always impatient with friends' recitations of their daily ins and
outs-who did them wrong and how they recouped their self-regard, or
not. He thought such talk was trivial and tried to not tell such
tales, even to himself. It was difficult for a compulsive repeater who
was used to saying over and over some phrase or song that caught in
his mind.
He understood now that nothing happened unless he wanted it to. The
humblings must have been something he wanted, and the unhappinesses
he'd thought stemmed from his deficiencies were feelings he'd
obviouswly cultivated.
And somehow, a few years ago, he began to take the pills and
everything changed. He was no longer so sure he was an unhappy person;
in fact, he felt pretty richtig most of the time and his brain was
freer to think and play. If that happened because he swallowed an
organic chemical it must mean his mind in its ceaseless processing
must have been interpreting in a particular way, a way that he no
longer had to experience. His unhappiness was an interpretation that
was not necessary; he could just as well be patient and observant,
mindful of how his narration of the extended recent time did not
require that he feel his life was unhappy. He tried to say, "I'm doing
ok, things are ok." He tried to say, "I notice that I feel down, that
the world seems futile and tiring, especially in the morning." And "I
notice that my mind is engaged and ticking more productively later in
the day." And "I notice that I sleep a lot, and maybe that is
compensation for reduced REM or deep sleep on account of sleeping
pills." And 。"
Siegfried gasps, wanting to please Ollie, "Is this honest enough?"
South finds it takes very little to get S to talk, but his talk
doesn't seem to identify any culprits. Ollie wants plots and
conspiracies, and all he gets are the rambling self-accusations of an
old man.
With Joseph it is another matter. He, still considered a fugitive BLA
outlaw, is subjected to all the usual tortures used on political
prisoners in Leavenworth and Lexington, USA.59
35 RE: Terror in Köln
June 1, 2004
Mr. Oliver South
Chief of Cleansing Activations
World Security Operations S.A.
C/o Crypt, Aachen Cathedral
Köln, Fourth German Reich
Dear Mr. South:
How are you? I am fine. I am a student in the seventh grade at the
Parker Tyler School for the Young and Evil in Shaker Heights, Ohio,
USA. My classmates and I have been reading in class about you and the
old man named Mr. Siegfried Rheinfahrt. We are writing to ask you to
stop torturing him and to to release Mr. Rheinfahrt and Mr. Joseph
Jamal. They are good people, and you should not be abusing them.
Mr. South I know you worked for the US Government in Iran and
Nicaragua and now help our Brave Soldiers by questioning people in
Kabul, Guantanamo and Baghdad. But you are not helping Our Cause by
taking pictures of the prisoners have sex with each other. Sex should
be between men and women who say "Okay, let's have sex' (with each
other, I mean.) Our teacher, Father Michelin Pirelli, III, of The
Absolutely Top Holiest Redeemer Reformed New Apostolic Charismatic
Catholic Church, Old Latin Order, has always required that we say
"Okay" before we have sex with him or go to the basement for
chastisement. (By the way, it is done the right way-nuns whip the boys
and priests whip the girls.) When they put The Question to us, I
always answer "Yes" politely, so I get the cat o'nine tails, which
feels a lot more fun than the cane. I think you should follow our
example. And then let them go, because they have always said "Okay" to
having sex, maybe even with each other. They might even have sex with
you if you asked better.
Yours truly,
Temujin Genghis Khan Rabinowitz-DuBois
and the whole 7th grade class at Parker Tyler
School
As Ollie South lets the letter drop musingly from his infected right
hand, he rubs his eyes and reminds himself he hasn't washed his hands.
Rinsing with water from the stoup, he wonders where this kid got
information about WSA. He suspects the international zionist
conspiracy, as evidenced by the next letter.
Mr. O. South, White Capitalist Devil
WSA
Mr. South:
We demand immediate cessation of sodomitical abuse perpetrated
against Joseph Jamal and Siegfreed Rheinfahrt. These men are heroes of
the worldwide anti-WTO libration movement and as such, even though
they are innocent of all charges, will heroicly remain silent about
their sabotage activities and of others they know carry them out. If
you do not put these Heros on a plane immediately for Kuala Lumpur we
will retaliate like you have never felt before.
signed,
The International Movement, totally legal supporters with ELF
Copenhagen and Rio
P.S. Watch out for your new Hummers in Kabul, you butt-fuck
simulator!
A message beeps in on South's Blackberry-powered Journada™ wireless,
and South is confronted with a photo of himself naked, simulating
receptive anal sex with Jamal atop the supine body of Rheinfahrt. In
very large capitals, the accompanying text reads US Pull Out!
Apologize to the Sodomized! Moral Is as Moral Does!
"Let Jamal go," he barks to the assistant lapping his thighs. Release
him drugged and well-dressed at the ramp to the Autobahn. No German
will give him a ride. They'll think he's Turkish."
"What about the old man?"
Memory floods the synapses with a message once sung to him (by J or B
or R ?):
Yes, it's love I offer you and hope that you will keep.
This love you see is true, from me;--but no-it is to weep,
For you-pale white-cannot trust love from whom you've loved too long
And yet deride with untaught pride-myh love is far too strong
So what thing can I offer you? What gift is there to give?
Not even dreams, or so it seems-for you refuse to live.
So this I offer now to you is weak with right and wrong-
Half dark, half light, half black, half white-a truly Bastard
Song.60
"Rheinfahrt stays. I think he knows more than he's told us. Get the
Softening Machine. I'm going to go Nova on his ass."
Siegfried, as Ollie hopes, is gratified to be lubricated and
piston-evacuated. In a puddle on the floor, he thankfully blurts out
what he thinks his dreadful interrogator wants to know.
"There is no actual conspiracy; there doesn't need to be a
conspiracy. The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination61 explain that all substance is composed of
non-self substances, and therefore no deep reality behind substance is
to be found.
Bohr was in contact with the timeless readers of the Pali canon and
he and his wife, during their three-way marathon writhing with
Heisenberg, they agreed on the Copenhagen Interpretation: The world we
see around us is real enough, but。 everyday phenomena are
themselves built not out of phenomena but out of an utterly different
kind of being. Wernie Heisenberg told me, 'The hope that new
experiments will lead us back to objective events in time and space is
about as well founded as the hope of discovering the end of the world
in the unexplored regions of the Antarctic.' And N. David Mermin adds,
'We now know that the moon is demonstrably not there when nobody
looks.62'
"In social systems," Siegfried groans out between thrusts of the
Softening Machine, "Freddie Hayek tells me, '[t]his means that, though
the use of spontaneous ordering forces enables us to induce the
formation of an order of such a degree of complexity (namely
comprising elements of such numbers, diversity and variety of
conditions) as we could never master intellectually, or deliberately
arrange, we will have less power over the details of such an order
than we would of one which we produce by arrangement.'63"
"You post-modernist Commies are all alike!" Ollie bellows. "What
happened in E. Germany that turned you around like this?"
"We thought Communism might be better if we stopped planning so much.
Read Bakhtin on Rabelais if you really want to know. Skip Nietzsche-he
was nuts."
Another text message beeps in, this one from Oswald Spengler; "Give
up on this you idiot! The West is dying and you ask why? NeoCon or a
liberal, what are you anyway?"
And
Telegram for O. North
From W. Reich
01/06/04
FORBID YOU USE MY MACHINE STOP STOP TORTURING MY OLD COMRADE STOP
WILHELM
Siegfried is left in the apse, as South and his WSA minions conclude
that they are unable to conquer the old man's will.
36 Operation Good Shepherd
When Timmy gets the call from his half-brother in Cleveland, he is in
Oslo, having a cigarette outside the Munchmuseet in an empty park next
to a freeway. He and Marcel are accompanying a Zimbabwean uncle, Mr.
Sithole's cousin Plainfield, and Plainfield's lover, the pretender to
the throne of Oman. After the royal wedding in Copenhagen, the High
Sheik's entourage have come in their yacht, frolicking in Bergen where
Kaiser Wilhelm used to park his boat, and then by private railroad car
to Oslo. They all love the smiling, almost-endless summer nights
glinting on blonde hair. Timmy is grateful for a few hours away from
the hub-bub.
The Peer Gynt Festival, the more-rational mystic's answer to
Bayreuth, is his uncle's destination: thousands gather in an outdoor
amphitheater to see the dance of the Mountain King and imagine
themselves as hardy pre-Vikings. Timmy is more taken with the
Munchmuseet and a self-portrait of Munch in a bathtub, photographed
around 1892. However, his absorption in the eyes of Edvard is
disrupted when he hears of the abduction.
"The old German and Joseph Jamal? What happened? Are they ok?"
"Herr Rheinfahrt was found at death's door under the apse at Aachen,
but Joseph is still missing. We sent letters to the security company
asking them to release him. He's a wanted fugitive, so we can't
contact the police."
"I've got to find him. He's the only one who can possibly tell me
what happened to Ana K."
"Yeah, the story of her previous life was just picked up by Oprah
over here."
"So where is Aachen? What am I gonna do?"
"Get to Cologne, that's the closest city. There can't be that many
blacks in Germany."
Timmy is frantic. through the fog of majoun so generously provided by
the Sheikh, who insists on being called Beaky ("It's short for
something you'd never be able to pronounce, my dears.") Unclear about
geography, he accepts his uncles' guidance and a suitcase full of
opium and flies off to Cologne. Marcel stays behind; the Sheikh and
his friends love to watch his fair Gallic skin get sunburned and peel.
Meanwhile, Joseph is picked up by a vanful of Turks on their way to
the Eau de Cologne factory with a load of bergamot oranges.
"We thought you were one of us," shouts the driver over the roar of
five lower gears. "What is the matter with you? You smell like a fried
chicken. Is that blood?"
After lengthy and difficult explanations in pidgin-German, Joseph is
taken to a guestworkers' hostel in the suburbs and cleaned up.
As our view goes to a medium shot, he slides his bruised limbs into a
deep bath fragrant with Dawn and thyme. Little Otika, the Czech
owner's beautiful daughter, offers him a deep-tissue massage, but,
exhausted, he falls asleep only to be wakened two days later by Otika
and Timmy Tilden. Trading two kilos of homemade Turkish Delight for
Otika's silence and eight kilos for carfare, the two former Amerikans
of Afrikan Descent are smuggled out of town in haste to the Danube
boats in Vienna. The Sheikh's contacts, which are of course kept
secret from the Turks, are waiting with a barge, equipped with a
clandestine stateroom under the load, turnips on their way to a
pickling factory in Yerevan.
After a few days on a private island in the Black Sea, our friends
are able to use new passports to fly to Dubai and join Cyril and
Vyvyan.
"Thank heavens you're safe," coos Vyvyan. "Cyril and I were so
frightened." Thanks to the Sheiks," Cyril adds, "we are having a
little reunion here-my nephew Mobe is here with his friend Ferd also.
You must join us for a few weeks of thrilling caravan travel. I can't
take No for an answer, as we all seem to be wanted by that dreadful
mercenary, Ollie South. I've already sent a scathing letter to The
Times about them!"
"Oh, Cyril. You didn't say anything to me before you sent it. You
know you can't spell, and they'll know where we are, you booby."
"Lots you know! Mobe helped me and we posted it through St.
Petersburg."
"Anyway, thank you for helping us," Timmy says. "But can someone
explain to me what is going on?"
"All will be revealed tonight. Now eat your apricots and dates. Rest!
Our little wooly lamb and our black sheep!"
。"
As he falls asleep, Timmy wants to know:
Are Cy and Vyv good gays or bad?
How do they know the Sheikhs?
What was going on in Oslo?
What do Mobe and Ferd really do?
Is Joseph a Buddhist or a terrorist?
Is Ollie South a Christian or a mercenary?
What about the murder of Ana K?
The Baby?
Herr Rheinfahrt?
Why does everybody seem to know everybody else?
37 Dedicated to the Memory of Siegfried Rheinfahrt
My memory is really bad.
I appreciate your dedication.
The thing I most can't remember is how a woman feels inside.
I've felt nothing lower than my heart for years.
64
The author admits he made Siegfried Rheinfahrt up. Siegfried isn't
even his real name. He was christened in St. Nicholas Church in
Leipzig in 1908 as just ordinary John Jacob Jingelheimer Schmidt, but
people would all shout at him. As a chorister the boy would have sung
the works of the Church's most famous kappelmeister, JS Bach. He often referred to this music as the
"architecture of life," meaning that Bach provided a structure for his
understanding during the complex changes he was to face throughout a
long and difficult.
The first documentary evidence of his name change is in his
membership card in Der Eigene, a physical strength group with
intellectual ties to Goethe's seminal romantic novel Werther. His youthful enthusiasm for camping and nude swimming
left him-although not his liaisons with English upper-class
homosexuals, one of which is thinly disguised in Spender's The Temple-- as Deutschland grew darker.
His thought, as recorded in his journals during his years at the
University in Freiberg, was first inflamed by the cult around Stefan
Georg, but far more illumined by Hesse's Journey to
the East. Although his philosophical studies show his great
love and aptitude for Heidegger, then professor, soon to be Rector, at
Freiberg, R remembers an increasing discomfort with H's "swooning for
a leader" who would throw himself and the people into the Dasein. He
is said by a classmate to have urinated on the library's holograph of
Also Sprach. Disenchanted, unwilling to
accept "the hysterical mystifications of right-wing graecophiles,"
Rheinfahrt left his studies and under the swaying of Christopher
Caudwell, he joined the Communist Party in 1928.
Comrades from that time equivocate, but refuse to agree to his
description of himself as physically repellent; they note his
honey-blond hair worn slightly too long and asking for the discipline
of a good brushing, a well-developed physique and a mind quick to
discern tactical opportunities in the contestations with the emerging
Nazi movement. Viewers may catch a glimpse of him as he speaks to a
crowd of Berliners evicted from their homes in Brecht's
semi-documentary Kuhle Wampe.
Unlike many of his peers, Siegfried was convinced by 1932 that the
Nazis would take state power in order to save capitalism for the
German bourgeoisie and its English investors. He disappeared, faking
his death at the hands of Brown Shirts in a riot in Berlin, and
embarked for Moscow for military and political training. Although
independent corroboration is not to be had, a journal entry in 1936
makes evident that he was back in Germany, involved with a Lutheran
minister whom we know only as Dietrich B___. His recollection is that
"Dietrich and I worshiped with great fervor," although he smiles as if
to ssay this is not to be taken seriously from a Comintern-trained
atheist. It may reflect S's disquiet about his sexual proclivities: he
writes a sad record of longing and vacillation in his two-year
courtship of a certain Karen, a Danish psychoanalyst, and his almost
immediate divorce from her after their marriage in 1938. Despite
considerable effort expended by the author, no clarity as to the
identity or subsequent fate of Karen can be offered here. The
precipitous rejection may have been followed by more dangerous events,
as Karen is said to be of Russian, perhaps Jewish, extraction.
The name Siefried appears frequently after that time in the Soviet
archives of clandestine operatives. Recently released and decoded, the
papers indicate a leading role for Rheinfahrt in the armed resistance
to the Nazis within Germany. Some scholars may denigrate the efforts
and the role of the Communists in the resistance, but the prominence
of Rheinfahrt is certainly the reason why he was to emerge as a major
figure in the liberated Democratic Republic of Germany.
What marks Rheinfahrt's activity in the Party and Government in
(East) Germany is the frequent criticisms and self-criticism he
underwent. Apparently R was not enthusiastic about the transfer of
industrial assets to the Soviet Union, and he is probably the unnamed
party leader who was sent twice for proletarian internationalist
education to Moscow. He returned each time chastened but quickly
involved in new controversies. During debates over development of
Leipzig's huge chemical plants, R is known to have said, "We don't
want to stink up our country for all future generations." He was
finally sent to Lubeck on the Baltic coast, where he oversaw harbor
and shipping operations.
He married his cook after she sustained a cerebral infarction in
1974. Much of his writing of the time speaks fondly of Helga:
My shriveling crabapple:
I am fond of you.
Your coffee and cigarettes smell dirty to me,
And I regret that I am inadequate in love.
It is not difficult to discern, hidden in this little poem, an
expression of great regret that he felt himself inadequate in love.
Found among the secret file of his papers is a photograph from 1973,
taken on a beach, of a nude young man draped over a Trabant, a photo
that he must have treasured, as he brought it with him into exile when
he left Germany in 1980. He has lived in a series of residential
hotels since that time, eking out his days with a faithful friend as
he nears the age of 100.
39 By the shores of Gitche-Gumee65
By the shores of Gitche-Gumee
By the shining, big-sea waters
Stand the huts of Sy-ree-nee-yah,
Freezing, rusting huts of labor.
Sirenians here make marvels:
They teach others to make anthrax,
Send instructions internet-wards
To prairie freaks and forest nutballs.
Once the home of Hiawatha
Now just Hiawatha High School
Where the boys play steroid football
And the girls get quickly pregnant,
Once the home of Old Nokomis
Now Nokomis Sunset Village
Nursing Reverend Mud-ju-ko-vis
Prophet of the coming Deluge.
Mud-ju in his acid springtime
Ate so many amanitas
That he had a realization.
Babbling brooks told him a secret:
Humans were not truly worthy
Rulers of the earth and skyways;
They usurped the place of betters,
Manatees and whales and dolphins.
The Holy Bible showed the secret;
God applied a test to Jonah,
Sent him where he had no business
Jonah tried to run away from
God's inscrutable decision
Got himself thrown to a seastorm.
Wisdom came to Jonah only
Deeply, deep inside Leviathan.
In God's mightiest of creatures
Jonah got Jehovah's message:
Noah's flood was not effective
Humans reproduced like rabbits
Spreading eco-cataclysms
From the ancient times to present
Jonah's truth was quickly censored
Masked by Moses and by Jesus.
The mention of the Nile and Jordan,
Baptism and wine from water
Hint at secrets Mud-ju-ko-vis
Learned to fathom in his trances
And organic chemistry lectures
At the Hiawatha High School.
Amphetamines helped Prophet Mud-ju
Win over big shoals of converts.
Soon the Napkin Ring pre-teeners
Cranked to headier trips through science
Skateboard geniuses picked their pimples
Over C A D design screens
Searching data base collections,
Of obscure heresies for wisdom.
Easily they found connections:
Pearl to pearl they threaded insights.
Whales were first terrestrial mammals
Who intelligently abandoned
Dusty earth for buoyant water
Freed from gravity they prospered
Swimming paradise untrammeled
Until humans came to hunt them
Greedy for their vital essence
Divine ambergris and oils.
Now the oceans grew polluted
Manatees were persecuted
Whales were facing stark extinction.
Righteousness demanded action.
Mud-ju-ko-vis charged his minions:
Go, disciples, simulate me
Game-plans leading to the triumph
Of marine mammals' command.
Toiling night and day they plotted
Graphs and maps of sea connections,
Found deep troughs, a Northwest Passage,
Researched aqua sound formation,
Bubbled out communications,
Listened for negotiation,
Til at last, to their relief,
God approved of their beliefs.
Achmed-Oedipa for now-put down the illustrated pamphlet she was
memorizing with little enthusiasm. "What drivel, set in what regular
feet!" she exclaimed inwardly, never yielding the least outward sign
of disbelief. She was well on her way to a ranking position within the
undulating Sirenian orders, one where she would be privy to the
deepest secret plans of the group. "I can't fish out the actual steps
they are taking, besides building tourist traps with surplus
submarines. What is the meaning of the turbans? I must get to the
bottom of this."
40 Venison Bride becomes a prophet
Born in December of 1948, Venison Bride grew up in the Cornish
section of Manistique, spending most of his youth looking dreamily
from the cliffs over Lake Superior, vaguely persuaded that something
special was coming his way. "The Wells Fargo Wagon" always had a
special poignancy for him, as did the underwear ads-no, any ads for
men's clothing (few in True and Argosy but plentiful in Esquire.) He
was precociously literary, having found Clifton Fadiman's Lifetime
Reading Plan at age 11 in a revolving paperback display at the
drugstore while awaiting his orthodontist appointment. He read all the
Great Books dutifully, racing to find out how each ended, annoyed at
the peculiarities of style that made Stendhal different from Balzac or
Homer from Virgil. He learned from another volume in the same display
that his sexual fantasies about the crew-cutted athletes in his school
were not normal, and that they had a name; in fact, he was most
devastated to learn that his urinary appendage had a name and a
different function, and he cried in embarrassment upon learning
"penis"was the accepted name for what he and his brothers were taught
to call the "wetter." And "vagina" was too confounding altogether.
Having no sisters, never having caught his mother without her girdle,
he was not so sure where this vagina was located or what it did.
Ignoring it all was by far the best course, he concluded.
Venison was named by his mother, who thought her son had a "freakish,
gamey look." His father, a sarcastic reformed drunk, predicted that
"he'd have an odd taste, not like ordinary meat," and it was true:
like all Scandinavians, his sweat was sharp and acrid, a combination
of genetics and overindulgence in rutabagas and lutefisk. He exhibited
only the qualities of meat from the town's frozen food locker, none of
the grace or equanimity of the live animal, and had the look of one
larded with strips of fat through his flesh and ready for roasting.
He spent all his summer days in the woods, moving from mossy stumps
to damp rocks. He liked the uprightness of the third-generation piney
woods, following deer trails he would look up to the cathedrals of the
forest with a longing to worship something, even the spare sunlight
between the rain-laden clouds scudding over from the Lake. His reading
had brought him to Alan Watts, and he imagined himself a Zen hermit,
sketched with a sumi-e brush in fuzzy lines in a woody cleft between
limestone walls. Far better to think of himself as a hermit in bosky
seclusion than a rejected, overweight and soggy egghead.
In his dreary high school, Ven felt himself isolated and befriended
only his teachers, making a mentor and confessor out of a recent
graduate of the heavily-Finnish Houghton Tech who taught physics and
chemistry. Mr. Nuola wore his flaxen hair in a flattop and neglected
to shave the fine hairs that grew at the top of his Mongolian
cheekbones, rendering him more manly in Venison's eye and even less
resistible in the eyes of the a-line skirted girls who gazed with
confusing desire at the porcelain skin revealed in the hollow between
his clavicles under starchy, not-quite-expertly ironed collars and
too-narrow bow ties.
Chemistry was Venison's meat. He loved making banana smells of esters
and quickly moved on to more complicated organic molecules. It was a
short run from there to the distillation of epinephrine from Drixan
inhalers and a growing taste for perspiring, gasping conversations
with his only friend, Ambrose Broussard, a very dark French Canadian,
originally Indian, farmboy. Ambrose suffered from obsessive-compulsive
tendencies, often walking backwards for miles to erase what had
happened earlier on the same route. It was he who led Venison to the
loft above the horse stalls for long heart-to-hearts and masturbation
as summer rains raised the smells of damp hay and animal excretions.
Ven and Amby wrote away for morning glory seeds and explored their
higher consciousness with the aid of IFIF and the Native American
Peyote Church, to which Ambrose had a legal claim to belong, trudging
through deep snows out onto the ice crags to peer into the fluorescent
blue water unfrozen underneath.
It was while staring into the impossibly deep waters of Lake Superior
that Venison received the first intimations of his special mission and
of mankind's aquatic mammalian peers. He learned that humans were
hairless because they were originally aquatic apes, able to evolve
into standing bipeds with the aid of the buoyant waters of the ages
when they first emerged from the arboreal ecosystems that had limited
them to chimp socialities.
In his speed-reading he also happened on early studies of neuro
anatomy, and found himself zeroing in on the hypothalamus.
(h´´pthl´ms) (KEY) , an important supervisory center in the brain,
rich in ganglia, nerve fibers, and synaptic connections. It is
composed of several sections called nuclei, each of which controls a
specific function. The hypothalamus regulates body temperature, blood
pressure, heartbeat, metabolism of fats and carbohydrates, and sugar
levels in the blood. Through direct attachment to the pituitary gland,
the hypothalamus also meters secretions controlling water balance and
milk production in the female. The role of the hypothalamus in
awareness of pleasure and pain has been well established in the
laboratory. It is thought to be involved in the expression of
emotions, such as fear and rage, and in sexual behaviors. Despite its
numerous vital functions, the hypothalamus in humans accounts for only
1/300 of total brain weight, and is about the size of an almond.66
How exciting to think that a part of the human brain was evolved from
the fish, and how plausible, looking past the gnostoc into the cold
waters of the Lake, that humans would be happier if they lived there
without the elaboration of aggressive behaviors exhibited by the
savage boys in gym class. How much better to be without these
functions and to live as the sturgeon once did in these waters.
HIAWATHA'S DEPARTURE
By the shore of Gitche Gumee,
By the shining Big-Sea-Water,。
Level spread the lake before him;
From its bosom leaped the sturgeon,
Sparkling, flashing in the sunshine;
On its margin the great forest
Stood reflected in the water,
Every tree-top had its shadow,
Motionless beneath the water.
  O'er the water floating, flying,
Something in the hazy distance,
Something in the mists of morning,
Loomed and lifted from the water,
Now seemed floating, now seemed flying,
Coming nearer, nearer, nearer.
  Was it Shingebis the diver?
Or the pelican, the Shada?
Or the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah?
Or the white goose, Waw-be-wawa,
With the water dripping, flashing,
From its glossy neck and feathers?
  It was neither goose nor diver,
Neither pelican nor heron,
O'er the water floating, flying,
Through the shining mist of morning,
But a birch canoe with paddles,
Rising, sinking on the water,
Dripping, flashing in the sunshine;
And within it came a people
From the distant land of Wabun,
From the farthest realms of morning
Came the Black-Robe chief, the Prophet,
He the Priest of Prayer, the Pale-face,
With his guides and his companions.67
In an upcoming chapter: new research suggests a link between the
hypothalamus and sexuality!
41 The World's Best Shopping
"We can outfit any expedition here. Dubai has the world's best
shopping," said Cyril to Timmy and Joseph as they walked through the
marble and gold portals of Jebel Ali Free Zone.
"Complete with RPGs, as you will need them heading through the Sudan,
" added Mobe 68. "You have a long, but history-enriched journey to
make. "
"Think of yourselves as Circassian royals, kidnapped from the
steppes, being carried on camels to the harem of the King of Khush. If
we could hire a few strapping Mameluks that would be the ticket!"
exclaimed Vyvyan. "How nice of the Canadians to make a vehicle much
more comfortable than the Bradley--safer too! And Timmy will be out of
the sun."
"David and Bathsheba!"
"What's that one with Omar Khyyam?"
"Cleopatra! We're doing Egypt, not Persia, silly old pig!"
"Fayyum! Let's have encaustic portraits done! Big eyes! Like Keane!"
"Where are we going?" asked Tim.
"Nairobi, of course," Cyril answered. "Mobe has some work to do
there, so he and Ferd have to fly. We will be on safari, following the
path of Stanley and Livingston. Here we are, the offices of Empire
Sattelite Uplinks and Security. You remember Bikki from Oslo, don't
you?"
Timmy thought he recognized the pretender to the throne of Onan,
changed out of his gold lame shorts, now djellaba-ed and kaffiya-ed,
who greeted Cyril and Vyvyan with a firm handclasp and bow.
"You can get a nice date milkshake and we'll join you at the
pearl-encrusted fountain over there in a little while, Timmy dear."
Whispered Vyvyan, shooing Timmy toward Akbar and Jeff's Majoun and
Date Oasis next door. "And Joseph, would you be so kind as to ask the
Medecins Sans Frontiers people upstairs how much food we are taking to
Darfur for them? How much water, how much dry tonnage, and how many
security guards we will need? We can go to El Geneina if they wish,
but that area is said to be stifling under Janjaweed. Thanks ever so. "
Suddenly, they were thrown to the ground by the Sheikh's bodyguards,
who started firing their automatics at two men in black Prada suits
across the way. "Get down, get down! It's WSO!"
Flipping forward in the air, the Prada men came on, raking the area
overhead with uranium-jacketed bullets, shattering the glass fronts of
the Empire SUS offices. Mall security guards and the Sheikh's men
surrounded their master, as well as Cy, Vyv and Joseph, pulling back
toward the elevator to the bunker underground. A grenade rolled
Prada-wards and exploded, deafening everyone and spraying expensive
black microfibers through the pierced and gilded ceramic arabesque
gratings at the doors of Akbar and Jeff's. Tim was struck by a portion
of one WSO assailant's head. When the bloody lump rolled to the floor,
Tim recognized the remaining profile from the night of sex at the
Hotel Real Desert. He wondered again how all these people were
connected.
"Well, dears," said Bikki, "I think we had better rethink the plans."
Cyril was firm. "No, it's much safer in the desert than across the
Straits and through Iran to Karachi. But Timmy and Joseph, we're so
sorry, but you will have to miss the safari, I think. How about this:
you go back to Paris and help our friends get their daughter to Buenos
Aires?
The Sheik agreed, adding, "I will send a couple of men-Neddy's
brothers Chesterfield and Butterfield-along just in case. As for you,
my old schoolmates, mightn't it be better to make your way through
Yemen and then ferry across to Djibouti?'
"Oh, I had such a good weekend in Djibouti。 years ago, of
course," sighed Vyvyan in reminiscence. "Remember dear, the French
fort and the French letters?"
42 Observations of the Omniscient Narrator
Ferd Eggan, the author, not the character in this novel, sits naked
at the computer. He finds his writing blocked.
" It's always something! My eyes hurt and they're blurry." He smokes
many cigarettes. He wants to write a clear exhortation to his peers:
voting for Kerry is only an unpleasant first step in a genuinely
worthwhile project: he wants to argue that world-historical changes
require that we accede to-nay, accelerate-the decline and fall of the
United States as a global power.
Pulling the last puff on a Marlboro Menthol Ultra Light before the
filter burns, he thinks, "My idea is complex and it's hard to make
this argument coherent." He stubs out the cigarette and clicks on the
draft of No Matter Who Gets Elected.
"I should cut away all the digressions here," he breathes out with
the thin smoke. He doesn't have much time today, as his friend Mary (a
model for MonaLisa of the Desert) is coming down from the central
coast and Walt, another friend, may join them for dinner. "Walt's
always making plans and canceling. I always cancel too, so shut up."
He looks at the draft.
"I liked that little recitative by Ilia in Idomeneo.68"
ILIA
Dell'Asia i danni ancora troppo risento,
e pur d'un grand'eroe al nome,
al caso, il cor parmi commosso,
e negargli i sospir ah no, non posso.
Ilia
Dell'Asia the damages still too much risento, and also d'un
grand'eroe to the name, to the case, the cor parmi affected, and
negargli the sospir ah not, I cannot. Babelfish translation service on
AltaVista.
Ilia
I still resent the destruction of Asia,
But this great hero-my heart is so moved--I cannot deny his right to
live.
My translation
"I may be too Midwestern, too philistine, to really enjoy the
slowness of that opera. I think Mozart should have speeded it up more.
Is it me or what? Back to the draft."
After a trip to the toilet and worry about bladder problems, he sits
down and lights another cigarette. Here he looks at the draft of his
argument.
America, Over69
Yeah, yeah, we should act to vote out the Bush/Cheney war-mongers,
but let's act for something better and bigger. Iraq is not just a
waste of lives over an oilfield. Iraq is a strategic battlefield where
ordinary young Americans, hoping for education and escape from the
suffocation of ordinary American lives, fight young Iraqis who hope
for something very similar. Inexperienced, naive fighters are pitted
against each other, one side to maintain the present corporate world
order and the other to replace it. And it's not a fight just between
Iraqis and Americans. Global market conflicts overwhelm any national
power: look at Sudan, Russia, Indonesia.70
No matter who gets elected on Nov 2, neither Kerry nor Bush will ever
dare to address the most important issue: what is America? Our
homeland? No, it's a military and political shield operating to
dominate the global market, a market that doesn't care what ordinary
Americans want. Bush and Kerry both use the rhetoric of American
security and American power, but neither will admit that it's not even
about this country. America as a great nation is over. We were, maybe,
maybe, weighing the ideals (and the failures) of Jefferson and Lincoln
and all, a country that embodied greatness once. But we are not any
more.71
Hey, What Happened?
We, the people who used be so productive, were lulled out of our
vitality by corporate grasping and by big demand for US goods and US
dollars, until the stock market took its dreadful dive in 2000-2001.
Prosperity was, of course, not spread equally among us: the average
income declined but corporate income skyrocketed to the top. Most
American working people have clung to belief in a future that afforded
a home, college for the kids, insurance even for domesticated
partners--until the US economy was converted from production of goods
to production of money and financial equities. That future was a
little like an LA garden, all exotic plants, tended and watered by
people and resources brought from across the borders. Now not just our
jobs, but even our money has gone overseas-to countries that actually
produce things. All America can offer is flex-time service work that
only immigrants can afford to take. Even the soldiers are taking pay
cuts because of outsourcing.
It Looks Bad
So, instead of despair over the loss of good old America, let's take
a compassionate look at the whole planet: living creatures nearly
ruined, cherished moral and religious ideals perverted into family
values, and competing, hostile forces that nations can not control. A
stronger, more secure America is a nostalgic fantasy. And we cannot
expect to negotiate our way out of continual wars either, because we
blindly let corporations sell our birthright for a mess of oil and
silicon chips--they use up all the bargaining chips. Neither Kerry nor
Bush, neither good cop nor bad cop, can pacify, let alone rectify,
this mess.
What do we do now?
Voting out Bush and Cheney could stimulate worldwide ideals of
freedom, democracy and peace. We will be more secure if we dismantle
America and open the whole garden. We can fight for a global order
that's fits for this earth, based on the desires we share with all
people everywhere. Things worth fighting for right now:
No Borders! (no border defense)
Free Health Care for Everyone! (nobody will need
insurance companies)
Free Child Care for Everyone! (any mother or
father can work and every child can feel secure)
Never mind that these are utopian ideas: the demands themselves move
people to realize that if these basic human needs were met then
competition for scarce resources would diminish. And they can be met,
abundantly, from the incalculable wealth we produce together on this
earth.
* * *
"I hope this says something," Ferd says to himself. "I grant that it
does matter whether it's an avowed fundamentalist Christian militarist
or a liberal who might be more malleable on issues, but Christ
Almighty! What a poop Kerry is!"
He's not confident that his argument addresses what he feels is an
underlying problem; he wants to show that it's ok to love this place
while fighting for a new global order that does away with American
superpower.
It's sad, isn't it? What we love is here, in this place. Where we are
alive, we learn to love the scene, the settings in which we are
conscious. Unnoticed, all the people and trees and sidewalks make a
place, a country, which we consider central to the experiences we
have. Their centrality might be illusory; after all, what we're really
attached to is our consciousness, our aliveness. But mental processes
become affect, our bodies and our brains do that in this place and we
call our place America. We need to find some way to keep the love, but
to give up the fatal connection to power, to glory. The republic of
liberty, at least the hope and the struggle for liberty that marked
the best of American days, is no longer to be. We mistook our best
ideals for dominance. Maybe our canny self-reliant spirit, our ready
smiles and readier cash, overwhelmed what possibilities of mutual aid
and sympathy we possessed early on.
We leave our author here, unsure that he has moved even himself.
 
43 Can Oedipa Be Trusted?
When last seen, Oedipa was well on her way to a ranking position
within the undulating Sirenian orders, one where she would be privy to
the deepest secret plans of the group. "I can't fish out the actual
steps they are taking, besides building tourist traps with surplus
submarines. What is the meaning of the turbans? I must get to the
bottom of this."
Her cel sounds with the special security ring. "Hello, mein blau
engel. Set for the following cypher: Liebst du um Schoenheit1." That will decode our conversation.," says the
scrambled voice she knows as the rasp of Lemmy's urgency.
Clara Schumann's lieder, "Liebst du um Schoenheit," Op. 12 No.
4,plays over the phone.
Liebst du um Schönheit,  (If you love for beauty,
o nicht mich liebe!  oh, do not love me!
Liebe die Sonne,  Love the sun,
sie trägt ein gold'nes Haar!  she has golden hair!
Liebst du um Jugend,  If you love for youth,
o nicht mich liebe!  oh, do not love me!
Liebe den Frühling,  Love the spring,
der jung ist jedes Jahr!  it is young every year!
Liebst du um Schätze,  If you love for treasure,
o nicht mich liebe.  oh, do not love me!
Liebe die Meerfrau,  Love the mermaid,
sie hat viel Perlen klar.  she has many clear pearls!
Liebst du um Liebe,  If you love for love,
o ja, mich liebe!  oh yes, do love me!
Liebe mich immer,  love me ever,
dich lieb' ich immerdar.  I'll love you evermore!)72
As the sad German music of mid-Victorian renunciation73 jangles in the earphone, Lemmy's message, routed through a
special cryptographic program, is made plain.
"You are in grave danger. Venison is accumulating millions of dollars
and thousands of recruits with the aim of taking humans back to their
aquatic beginnings."
"I already know that."
"What you don't know is that he has convinced his followers that a
part of their brain, originally evolved in fishes, was passed in a
distorted way to humans, causing aggressive behavior. They are
removing the hypothalami of all the Sirenia converts, with the goal of
making docile workers and re-aligning human sex to periods of estrus
only. "
"That's impossible!"
"Impossible? Look at all the Sirenians. The heads of all the converts
are wrapped in white turbans, which are conveniently mistaken for Sufi
mystic gear, but in fact the turbans are stylized bandages covering
the trepanning scars in their foreheads which were openend to remove
the offending glands."
In his aquatic bunker under Manistique Bay, Venison is listening to
the intercepted conversation between Oedipa and Lemmy. He has been
suspicious of her since she began to show signs of what he was
convinced was a male mind. She was bold, logical--nothing like the
females he wanted for Sirenia. The insights he had won from his
explorations of consciousness made Venison very clear about enemies:
he summoned Amby and the Pride of Sirenia bodyguards.
"Get that girl-if she is a girl," Venison orders. I want you to test
her hypothalamus to see if she is male or female.74 We have to kill him, her or it, regardless. She's an
interloper who wants to interfere with my mission. The whales will
rule the world again, or my name isn't Jonah!"
44 Kenya with Mobe and Ferd
Mobe and Ferd first see Nairobi from a taxi, surrounded by Masai in
brilliant red cloaks trying to march from a park in downtown Nairobi
to the British High Commission to highlight their rejection of
colonial-era agreements that stripped them of their land. M &
F are forced to flee on foot, as heavily armed police officers fire
tear gas at the demonstrators and chase them for blocks. The Masai
carry their traditional wooden staffs, knives and rungus, wooden clubs
they use for self-defense, and picket signs.
Later, at the Nairobi Hilton, they follow the story on television.
"As a government, we are committed to the rule of law and the
protection of private property,'' declares Amos Kimunya, the minister
for lands and housing.
The NY Times Marc Lacey tells viewers, over pictures of tall young
African men with thin spears, "In scenes reminiscent of Zimbabwe's
land seizures, angry Masai tribesmen have begun marching onto
sprawling ranches held by white settlers in Kenya's lush Rift Valley
and claiming the tracts as their own." [Pictures of lush land, with
mountains in the background are shown, then police officers in riot
gear forcibly ousting the men,] . whom the government calls
invaders, as well as their cattle. The number of Masai arrested in
recent days exceeds 100. At least one person, an elderly Masai man,
has died, shot during a confrontation with the police."
BBC World News tells our heroes that Kenyan officials have no
intention of following Mugabe's example in Zimbabwe. Uprooting the
ranchers, government officials said, would be disastrous for the
economy, which relies heavily on Western assistance and on tourism, a
major source of hard currency. On top of that, acceding to the Masai
might encourage similar demands by the scores of other ethnic groups
in Kenya, many of which have historic grievances of their own,
officials added.
In a special program produced by FOX News Africa, the blustery
correspondent interviews wealthy Kenyan farmers. "The young warriors
move in and cut the fences and bring in their cattle,'' said one white
rancher, describing the recent raids in northern Laikipia. "You get
between 5,000 and 10,000 head of cattle on your land.'' He called for
firmer action against the trespassers, some of whom are from the
related Samburu tribe.
"The police need to be harsher,'' he said. "There have been too many
warnings. There need to be more arrests. We need quicker, more
forceful action.''
But CNN correspondents praised the government: "The government has
adopted a cautious approach to land reform. A new constitution that is
being drafted proposes that the long leases granted to some wealthy
ranchers, some of which exceed 950 years, be reduced to 99 years.
"Happy Anniversary," Mobe tells Ferd. "It seems the land controversy
started this month around the 100th anniversary of an agreement
reached between British colonialists and some Masai elders. The deal
pushed the Masai far from their traditional turf in the Rift Valley,
where a railway was being built, into reservations on far less
desirable land.
"Yes," replies Ferd, booting up the computer plans of the hospital
they target for the rescue operation, "Signed on Aug. 15, 1904, with
the illiterate Masai using thumbprints, the document said the Masai
leaders 'of our own free will, decided that it is for our best
interests to remove our people, flocks, and herds into definite
reservations away from the railway line, and away from any land that
may be thrown open to European settlement.'''
Mobe asks, "Exactly what did the Masai leaders received in exchange?
As the years have passed and the Masai population has grown (and more
and more of Africa becomes desertified), rangeland has become more
scarce and the Masai's precious cattle have had far less land on which
to graze. Masai leaders say the agreement ought to be invalidated
because their predecessors were clearly taken advantage of by the
white settlers.
Radio Free Kenya presents a voice of protest: "We're now squatters on
our own land,'' said Ratik Ole Kuyana, a Masai tour guide who narrowly
escaped arrest at the protest in Nairobi on Tuesday. "I'd rather spend
my days in prison than see settlers spend their days enjoying my
motherland. I think Mugabe was right.''
The room service porter, who is actually a local operative helping
them avert the female genital mutilation scheduled for two days hence,
informs M & F that, in moving onto the private land, "the
Masai have not seized houses or harmed ranchers. But they have
destroyed the electrical fencing that rings the properties and driven
their own herds onto the land to graze." He tells them the area that
has been the center of the protests is known as Laikipia, which sits
just north of the Equator near the towns of Nanyuki and Isiolo. It
boasts spectacular views of snowcapped Mount Kenya and more endangered
mammals than any other area in East Africa, including the black rhino,
Grevy's zebra and reticulated giraffe.
A National Geographic magazine on the coffee
table tells them, "Aggravating the current conflict is a drought that
has hit parts of Kenya hard, prompting President Mwai Kibaki to
declare a state of emergency recently."
After the news programmes, they watch a televised debate. "Oh, no,"
shouts Mobe, "It's my great-great aunt Karen! If she's here that means
our mission must be known to them!"
Karen, representing WTO tourist interests, indicates that Kenya's
fragile tourist industry has been hurt in the past by fears of
insecurity. The Laikipia area is a growing tourist area, with vast
private game ranches.
Karen tells the viewers, "The Masai have played an essential role in
Kenya's terrorism-I mean tourism--strategy. Of Kenya's 50-odd ethnic
groups, the Masai, with their red tunics and traditional ways, are the
best known. They perform dances at lodges across the country, in which
they chant in unison and leap vertically to seemingly impossible
heights. Tourists also frequently visit Masai villages that highlight
their age-old way of life, in which all land is considered communal
and cows are the measure of wealth-very ethnic," Karen concludes.
But the Masai, who are among the poorest Kenyans, complain "We see
little profit from tourism and that many of the people who dress as
Masai at lodges are actually from other tribes."
"We're associated with wild animals,'' complains Roselinda Soipan, a
Masai lawyer who appeared in court on Tuesday to defend some of the
protesters rounded up in Nairobi. "If a tourist comes to Kenya and
doesn't see a Masai, it's like they didn't see an elephant or a rhino.
We're human beings, and we have a right to agitate for our rights.''
We'd better hurry with our plans," says Mobe. "Our little caper is
taking place against a backdrop of major global climate, social and
political changes."
"Well, duh," agrees Ferd.
45 Dreamy Time
A dream interrupted by the wake-up call at 3 am. Ana K.'s brother,
now with a golden beard, young cool glasses, accompanied by a
boisterous film crew. They took up all available space.
I was with comfortable friends and attractive young
men in a setting like Morocco-like Gerôme's Snake Charmer:
75
blue marble arabesques, sumptuous carpets, pointed
arches.
"What can I give you?" he kept asking.
I was incommoded because the cutest young man was with him, but
looking at me through long lashes over his muscled bicep, as if to
say, "isn't this actually better?"
"No," I said to the brother, "things have been dreary since you got
here. I came with friends to study the language and culture and now
your blond crew want to bring in girls. You can give me nothing. "
To Do List for Nairobi 9/29
500 ft nylon rope
nebulizer w/capacity to fill operating room with drug vapor
MDA NOT MDMA (no nerve damage-better hallucinogen76)
Large quantities Demerol, Valium
Gurney with false bottom to "disappear" recumbent figure
Surgical scrubs, masks, etc.
Sound system
Robotic quadrupeds
Visas for M, F, body in casket
Car arrivals timed for 7:49 am
Medivac helicopter timed for 8:37 am
Mix (excerpts):Hovhanhess' Mysterious Mountain77,
Messiaen's Meditations Sur le Mystere de la Sainte Trinité78, Ligeti's Clocks and Clouds79, Berio's Coro80, Lauridsen's Lux
Aeterna81(pop sublimity)
Subject: Daily Dharma, August 30, 2004
from Bassui Tokusho Zenji82
In a dream you may stray and lose your way home. You ask someone to
show you how to return or you pray to God or Buddhas to help you, but
you still can't get home. Once you rouse yourself from your
dream-state, however, you find that you are in your own bed and
realize that the only way you could have gotten home was to awaken
yourself. This [kind of spiritual awakening] is called "return to the
origin" or "rebirth in paradise." It is the kind of inner realization
that can be achieved with some trainin。 . You would be making a
serious error, however, were you to assume that this was true
enlightenment in which there is no doubt about the nature of reality.
You would be like a man who having found copper gives up the desire
for gold.
"Showtime!" The plan is begun, 04:15 hours.
46 After a couple of days in a Cologne emergency ward .
.
released to the streets without papers or money, Siegfried Rheinfahrt
is now derelict, homeless in the part of the Bundestadt that he least
understands. He makes his way to Frankfurt and the wardrobe-sized
apartment of the one person he remembers from his few visits to the
West during his ascendancy in the E. German Party. He rings hesitantly
on a door in the red-light district. A business card taped below the
peephole reads
Fraulein Doktor Klara Kaligari,
chiro-podiatrie, psychoanalyse
mystische sprechen mit den toden,
Marxist-Leninist-Mao-tse-Tung-Thought
film-regie
(geliebte großartigtochter von Karla B-S,
berühmte liebeskind
von Clara Schumann und Johannes Brahms.)
83
To the sound of für Elise, a stooped old personage in a blonde wig
totters to open the door. Peering through false eyelashes, she croaks,
"Comrade Siegfried Rheinfahrt, you look like the leftovers of death
warmed up in der microwave. I'm glad to see you so miserable. Come in
and see me; I can lubricate and be ready in a minute. And now, really
no teeth. You used to sa。 Ha! Ha-ha-ho!" Siegfried can only
stagger to the greasy Biedermeyer sofa and collapse. "Can I please
have ein glass von wasser?"
"My, my, how you have fallen down, you euro-communist, you
revisionist traitor. Putzi, give my old friend some tea," the old
personage tells a young man with a video camera, sitting next to the
smoking stove.
"This is Rosa von Praunheim, my spiritual daughter," she tells
Rheinfahrt. "Rosa, mein Putzi, meet Siegfried. This decrepit old man
was once my comrade and my lover. "
"Klara, we were never lovers," says Siegfried, reviving with sips of
strong tea. "You knew always that I love mankind; I never could not
love a man."
"I am not a man!" shrieks Klara. "And anyway, Karen is not a real
woman. All her executrix posing and literary pretension. " She turns
to Rosa to say, "Mein sister Karen stole him and they became my
adversaries."
"Karen has great-grandchildren already, whom she hates and never
sees," Siegfried tells her. She's busy relating publicly for the World
Trade Organization now. She consults on security operations for the
whole of Europe-busy shooting terrorists, I'm sure, when she's not
stuppen that Kolonel South."
"It's the collision of our Deutsh Stalinism and sex desire, I'm
afraid," chimes in Rosa von P., pointing his camera at Rheinfahrt.
"Please, Klara, can you help me? I know you use morphine, " Siegfried
moans.
"How I remember that day in 1953 when the workers struck in Berlin
and the Party told them to stop, sighs Klara.
If we now have a socialist regime, the Berlin
workers reasoned, then we should no longer suffer under the weight
of production quotas. When Benno Sarel recounts the revolts of the
construction workers along Stalinallee and throughout Berlin, which
on June 16 and 17, 1953, spread to the big factories, the workers'
neighborhoods, and then the suburbs and countryside of East Germany,
he emphasizes that the most important demand of the factory worker
was to abolish the production quotas and destroy the structural
order of command over labor in the factories. Socialism, after all,
is not capitalism.
84
"We should have emphasized that socialism also means the end of
bourgeois ideas of love!"
"Help me, Klara," Siegfried begs. "I need morphine. Joseph is
todt-dead I am so sure. I am so alone. I am abject."
 -----------------------------------------------------------------
Extra Credit
Schumann/Brahms Assignment 
by Elaine Ernst Schneider
May 2, 2001 
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0679745823/lessontutor
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0395891191/lessontutorSchumann
(Master Musicians Series)
Background: 
As a young man, Johannes Brahms was a close friend of Robert and
Clara Schumann. They socialized publicly and Johannes was often in the
Schumann home. When Robert Schumann died, Johannes continued his
friendship with Clara. Clara Schumann, herself a renowned pianist,
gave concerts that showcased her late husbandís work to support
herself and her children. It is not known whether Johannes had always
loved Clara or if the affection sprang from the relationship that grew
after Robertís death. History does tell us that Brahms professed his
love for Clara though they never married.
For more detailed biographies of each of these classical composers,
refer to:
Johannes Brahms, and Robert Schumann, by Betty
Fry.
 
Assignment Choices: 
1. Write a dialogue that might have taken place between Clara and
Johannes after Robertís death. Begin the conversation with Brahms
confessing to Clara that he loves her. Use your imagination. Here are
some questions to get you started thinking:
- What might Brahms say to Clara to first open up the subject of his
love for her?
- Does Brahms propose marriage or is it he who never asks, rather
than she who refuses?
- What might have been Claraís reasons for not marrying Johannes
Brahms? Was she still in love with Robert? Did Clara fear that if she
married Brahms that it would be too awkward to continue concertizing
with Robertís pieces? Or was there some other reason she refused
Brahmsí affection?
2. Write the lyrics for a song Brahms might have written for Clara.
Keep in mind that words for songs during this time period usually
rhymed.
3. If you play an instrument, create an original short piece that
Brahms might have written for Clara. Consider the emotions of love and
how they might be conveyed through the music. Would the tempo be slow
and the tone sad because love is unrequited, or might the tempo be
fast and furious to show the frustration of two souls that never
connect?
As you begin these assignments, remember to keep in mind what was and
was not ìsocially acceptableî in Johannes and Claraís day.
Email your assignment to
The Story Continues。
47 A Time for Action
04:30 hrs. Time for action in Nairobi. Ferd reaches for the remote
just as Kenyan and other leading African runners are shown at the
Olympic marathon. They almost always win, but this year's apparent
winner, a low-ranked Brazilian, is knocked off the track by a
defrocked Irish priest, impelled onto the course on a mission from
God. The Kenyans are shown moving to protect each other as the tv
clicks off.
Voice over, through the radio in the car, on the television at the
airport, in the ambulance waiting outside the hospital, we hear part
of an historic speech, in honor of Kenyatta Month:
"If we unite now, each and every one of us, and each tribe to
another, we will cause the implementation in this country of that
which the European calls democracy. True democracy has no colour
distinction. It does not choose between black and white. We are here
in this tremendous gathering under the K.A.U. flag to find which road
leads us from darkness into democracy. In order to find it we Africans
must first achieve the right to elect our own representatives. That is
surely the first principle of democracy. We are the only race in Kenya
which does not elect its own representatives in the Legislature and we
are going to set about to rectify this situation. We feel we are
dominated by a handful of others who refuse to be just. God said this
is our land. Land in which we are to flourish as a people. We are not
worried that other races are here with us in our country, but we
insist that we are the leaders here, and what we want we insist we
get. We want our cattle to get fat on our land so that our children
grow up in prosperity; we do not want that fat removed to feed others.
He who has ears should now hear that K.A.U. claims this land as its
own gift from God and I wish those who arc black, white or brown at
this meeting to know thi。.  Bribery and corruption is prevalent in this country, but I am not
surprised. As long as a people are held down, corruption is sure to
rise and the only answer to this is a policy of equality. If we work
together as one, we must succeed.
Jomo Kenyatta, speech at the Kenya African Union Meeting at Nyeri,
July 26, 1952
Sirens scream, paramedics and nurses bustle from station to station,
patients awaken from nights spent on hard chairs to request attention:
early morning is always busy at a hospital. When the obviously
non-African anesthesiologist and consulting surgeon enter the
operating theatre, heads among those bobbing around the young patient
turn briefly but see not much more than their surgical masks. The
young patient is already prepped, draped with white sheeting, her
knees up, feet in stirrups, sedated and monitored. Her parents,
anxious for their daughter who has only just resigned herself to
undergo this procedure, huddle in a corner, dressed in sterile scrubs.
The older aunt of the girl holds her hand and whispers comfort in her
ear, which is haloed by the white stretch cap over the hair braided
close to her scalp. A Kenyan doctor nods for anesthesia, and a
commanding woman dressed in white with a tall head wrap approaches the
patient; initiating the ritual, she lifts a small, precise scalpel.
She pauses, and quotes from her nation's most famous author.
[The discourse she quotes is extended and well worth reading in Facing Mount Kenya. See the website of Female
Genital Cutting Education and Networking Project
<www.fgmnetwork.org>where the chapter on clitoridectomy
is printed in full, The Story Continues cites only short excerpts
below.]
INITIATION
OF BOYS AND GIRLS
THE CUSTOM of clitoridectomy of girls, which we
are going to describe here, has been strongly attacked by a number of
influential European agencies-missionary, sentimental pro-African,
government, educational and medical authorities. We think it necessary
to give a short historical background of the method employed by these
bodies in attacking the custom of clitoridectomy of girls.
[Here Jomo Kenyatta, political leader of Kenya's independence,
describes the context in the integral Kikiyu culture of the custom of
clitoridectomy of girls and other rituals surrounding it, as well as
initiation ceremonies for boys. He makes it clear that these customs
functioned to make young people part of community religious and social
life and compares them to Jewish circumcision. He also makes plain the
contemptuous-and contemptible-efforts of the Scottish Mission to
destroy all "pagan" customs of the Kikyu people.]
However, this urge for abolishing a people's social custom by force
of law was not wholeheartedly accepted by the majority of the
delegates in the Conference. General opinion was for education which
would enable the people to choose what customs to keep and which ones
they would like to get rid of.
It should be pointed out here that there is a strong community of
educated Gikuyu opinion in defence of this custom. In the matrimonial
relation, the rite de passage [rite of passage]
is the deciding factor. No proper Gikuyu would dream of marrying a
girl who has not been circumcised, and vice versa. It is taboo for a
Gikuyu man or woman to have sexual relations with someone who has not
undergone this operation. If it happens, a man or woman must go
through a ceremonial purification, korutwo
thahu or gotahikio megiro-namely, ritual
vomiting of the evil deeds. A few detribalised Gikuyu, while they are
away from home for some years, have thought fit to denounce the custom
and to marry uncircumcised girls, especially from coastal tribes,
thinking that they could bring them back to their fathers' homes
without offending the parents. But to their surprise they found that
their fathers, mothers, brothers and sisters, following the tribal
custom, are not prepared to welcome as a relative-in-law anyone who
has not fulfilled the ritual qualifications for matrimony. Therefore a
problem has faced these semi-detribalised Gikuyu when they wanted to
return to their homeland. Their parents have demanded that if their
sons wished to settle down and have the blessings of the family and
the clan, they must divorce the wife married outside the rigid tribal
custom and then marry a girl with the approved tribal qualifications.
Failing this, they have been turned out and disinherited.
[Some Aspects of the Ceremonies]。 .
Late in the afternoon an arch of banana trees and sugar-canes is
built at the entrance of the homestead of the matuumo。 .To start the race a ceremonial horn is blown.
At this point the girls, who are not allowed to participate in the
race, start out walking to the tree, escorted by a group of senior
warriors and women singing ritual and heroic songs. When the girls are
near the tree, the ceremonial horn is again sounded, this time
indicating that it is time for the boys to start the race. The boys
then start running in a great excitement, as though they were going to
a battle. The truth is, it is really considered a sort of fight
between the spirit of childhood and that of adulthood.。 . ceremonial racing 。) determines the leader of that
particular age-group. The one who reaches the tree first and throws
his wooden spear over the tree is elected there and then as the leader
and the spokesman of the age-group for life. It is believed that such
a one is chosen by the will of the ancestral spirits in communication
with Ngai, and is therefore highly respected.
The mogumo ceremony occupies only a short
time. As stated above, the boys climb the tree, break the top
branches, while the girls collect leaves and twigs dropped on the
ground. These are later tied into bunches and carried back to the
homestead to keep the sacred fire burning the whole night and also to
be used in other rituals, especially in making the initiates' beds.
The songs rendered by the relatives and friends round the foot of the
tree generally pertain to sexual knowledge. This is to give the
initiates an opportunity of acquainting themselves with all necessary
rules and regulations governing social relationship between men and
women.
At the completion of kunna mogumo (breaking of
the sacred tree), the boys and girls are lined up according to the
order of their adoption. Here a ceremony of taking the tribal oath
(muuma wa anake) is conducted by the elders
of the ceremonial council. The initiates promise by this oath that
from this day onward they will in every respect deport themselves like
adults and take an responsibilities in the welfare of the community,
and that they will not lag behind whenever called upon to perform any
service or duty in the protection and advancement of the tribe as a
whole. Furthermore, they are made to promise never to reveal the
tribal secrets, even to a member of the tribe who has not yet been
initiated.。 . The songs they sing on the homeward march are directed
towards denouncing all things that are not fit and proper for any
adult member of the community to do. Moreover, the phrases embodied in
these songs are to encourage the initiates to become worthy and
honourable members of the adult community into which they are to be
graduated.。 .
At the end of the ceremony the boys and girls are free to go to their
respective homes to rest until next morning. Care is taken to protect
them from anything that might inflict wounds upon them, as the
shedding of blood is regarded as an omen of ill luck. The initiates
are guarded the whole night by senior warriors against outside
interference. In every home a ceremonial doctor (mondo-mogo wa mambura) is assigned by the traditional council
(njama ya kirera) to protect the initiates
against any possible attacks from witchcraft and also against any
temptation or enticement to indulge in sexual intercourse.。 .[ After The Girl is Operated On]
At the time of the surgical operation the girl hardly feels any pain
for the simple reason that her limbs have been numbed, and the
operation is over before she is conscious of it. It is only when she
awakes after three or four hours of rest that she begins to realize
that something has been done to her genital organ. The writer has
learned this fact from several girls (relatives and close friends) who
have gone through the initiation and who belong to the sane age-group
with the writer.
This signifies that the children have now been born again, not as the
children of an individual, but of the whole tribe. The initiates
address one another as "Wanyu-Wakine," which
means "My tribal brother or sister." When the ceremony is completed
all burst into ritual song. They bid farewell to one another and then
leave the homestead under the escort of their relatives. On the
arrival at their respective homes a sheep or rat is killed by the
parents to welcome them home again and anoint them as new members of
the community (koinokai na kohaka mwanake or
moiretu maguta). At this ceremony the parents
are provided with brass ear-rings, as a sign of seniority. This is
done when the first-born is initiated.。 .
With such limited knowledge as they are able to acquire from their
converts or from others, who invariably distort the reality of the
irua in order to please them, these same missionaries pose as
authorities on African customs. How often have we not heard such
people saying: "We have lived in Africa for a number or years and we
know the African mind well."? This, however, does not qualify them or
entitle them to claim authority on sociological or anthropological
questions. The African is in the best position properly to discuss and
disclose the psychological background of tribal customs, such as irua, etc., and he should be given the
opportunity to acquire the scientific training which will enable him
to do so. This is a point which should be appreciated by well-meaning
anthropologists who have bad experience in the difficulties of
field-work in various parts of the world.
Jomo Kenyatta85, from Facing
Mount Kenya
86
48 Rabelaisian Body Matters and Flight to the Forest
Primeval
After manfully squeezing his nose to unseat a particularly
intractable blackhead, pressing the flesh to the tearful point where
he was forced to consider that the incipient rosacea there might be
making the rhynodermis too thick, tougher that it had been when he was
quite frequently used to squeeze in his lubricated, more comedogenic
youth, Ambrose Broussard pulled down his underwear, kicked when the
briefs-as they always did-caught on his moccasins, and sat down on the
toilet. His buttocks seemed to hurtle past their usual resting point
and collided, with little padding to diminish the impact as his flesh
had gone the way of lipodystrophy, with the cold white rim of the
toilet. A man alone can easily neglect to lift the seat, although
Ambrose had recently replaced the unhygienic seat left behind by the
previous tenant with a pristine pink one which he thought made a
whimsical match with the pink tiles on the bathroom walls, yet he'd
never been moved to harmonize the blue color of the floor tiles,
perhaps because he'd painted above the tile wainscoting in a
semi-gloss aubergine he thought was a further inspired choice.
When he hit the rim, he was pleased that he was able to ejaculate
"Holy Shit!" within microseconds of contact, congratulating himself on
the miniscule time-lapse between pain signals and an apposite
rejoinder. Having feared just this kind of undignified clapping of
tender skin onto the chilly and narrow porcelain, he was wont to leave
the seat down, until recently when it became redolently clear that
tiny droplets of urine were deliquescing to burden the air with the
fug of a public latrine. There was no completely agreeable solution
except permanent vigilance.
In any case, after replacing the seat and spreading his anal pore,
his disappointment at the quantity and texture of the waste he pushed
out was mollified only when a very organized plume of gas was emitted,
followed by a much more gratifying, elongated extrusion of shit and a
final firm fart that enabled the distended belly to regain some
smoother roundness. The unhindered egress of his excreta permitted
Ambrose a moment of reflection regarding the toilet as the biological
altar where-not unlike the deep connection with Nature inherited from
his Native American forebears--through autonomic muscular contractions
and flexions of the organism, one performed the ritual of self-worship
in which the very alimentary-eliminative tubular configuration of the
human body was experienced most to resemble that of other
animals--fundamentally. In fact, the coincidence of the English adverb
connoting radical excavation of the underlying ground of animal life
with the noun denoting the bottom part of the human body-not counting
the lower extremities-entered his mind, spiced with a mild frisson of
pride at the "primitive" adaptation that efficaciously coordinated
involuntary peristaltic motion and voluntary bearing down and pushing
to achieve evacuation. The sensation of clean unopposed extrusion,
along with the bombast of flatulence and the highly parabolic
presentation of urine through the manually guided penis, was
pleasurable in the extreme, wreathed with smells that one could not
deny were olfactory tokens of life, of healthy inward- and out-ness,
although only one's own could be granted this status and exempted from
the general disgust others' bodily excrescences could awaken in one if
they originated from any of the rest of us. Ambrose had, like many
warriors of the spirit, had occasion to taste this matter, but his
palate rejected the ugly bitter flavor-so surprisingly, intolerably,
different from its fetid and rich olorousness--and he concluded that,
despite the alluring abjection it most theatrically might otherwise
offer, coprophagia would never be his choice at the banquet table of
infantile sexual fixations.
Meditating on the high estimation Pascal placed on frequent and
copious defecation, enjoying especially the more vernacular version of
the triadic encomium to "good shoes,. ?., and a warm place to shit"
(what was that other priority he couldn't remember?), Ambrose turned
his attention to more rigorous exigencies of the present situation.
That is, he remembered he was entrusted by the Big Humpback Himself to
bring in the suspicious Oedipa for testing. Hopping over the cold
tiles, disregarding
creeping neuropathic foot pain, attributable once again to what were
blithely called medication side-effects, he therefore gave himself a
shake, eschewed a wipe, preferring the prospect of a warm lavage, and
turned on the shower, lighting a cigarette to enhance the waiting time
while the hot water made its way from the distant heater to his
bathroom. When all was right, he tossed his butt into the toilet and
lathered and scrubbed.
Ambrose Broussard knew about what were called "two-spirited" among
the anthropological queers who wanted to authenticate their own
proclivities and choices, and he felt a strong antipathy at the
prospect of eliminating Oedipa. Moreover, his early support for his
sworn blood-brother Venison's visionary schemes had diminished sharply
in the last several months as the white-turbaned flocks of converts
increased and Ven took on the vocal tones of incipient madness.
Ambrose stalked out to his vehicle, a feul-cell equipped hybrid
Hummer, roared to the edge of the compound, and swept Oedipa away with
minutes to spare before the Fruit of the Sea armed security arrived.
"What the fuck are you doing?" demanded Oedipa. "Let me out of here!"
"The Killers are coming for you, and me too now that I'm running with
you. We'll ditch this car at The Big Two-Hearted River. We'll go into
the woods and walk to Seney, hop the train there."
Chapter 49 Nick, Atala and Rene, Ambrose and ?
"The Killers are coming for you, and me too now that I'm running with
you, Ambrose told Oedipa. "We'll ditch this car at The Big Two-Hearted
River. We'll go into the woods and walk to Seney, hop the train
there."
"That's ridiculous," Oedipa shot back. "What Killers? What for? And
there is no train any more."
"I mean we'll drive to Seney, through Blaney Park, and ditch the car
at Seney. That's what I mean."
"What are you talking about? I don't know you, and I'm not going with
you anywhere. Take me back to Manistique."
"Look, don't go all ignorant on me. I'm Ambrose. The Killers are
Venison's Fruit of the Sea. They're after you."
"Why would they be after me?" Oedipa asked.
"Yeah, I wonder," Ambrose was getting impatient. "They might want to
check out a Sirenia disciple who wasn't what she said she was?"
When there was no answer to that, he asked, "Just who are you,
anyway? You're really a guy, eh?"
"No!" she retorted. "What's it to you, anyway?"
"I'm sick of Venison and I'm saving your ass. That's what's it to
me."
They said nothing more until they stopped for food at the stoplight
in Germfask.
49 The Killers
The door of Henry's lunchroom opened and two men came in. They sat
down at the counter.
"What's yours?" George asked them.
"I don't know," one of the men said. "What do you want to eat, Al?"
"I don't know," said Al. "I don't know what I want to eat."
Outside it was getting dark. The streetlight came on outside the
window. The two men at the counter read the menu. From the other end
of the counter Ambrose Broussard watched them. He had been waiting for
Oedipa in the bathroom.
"Fuck it, give us four fried egg sandwiches to go. We gotta go, Al."
"Fuck it, ok, but I want fries."
"Two fries, four fried egg sandwiches, right?" George asked.
"Say, you're a pretty bright boy, eh? Yeah. And hurry up. We gotta
get to Manistique fast."
Al lit a cigarette. "Give me a cup of coffee now though, "he said. He
turned toward Ambrose. "What's up, Chief?" he asked Ambrose.
"Nothing," Ambrose picked up his mug and swallowed coffee, It was too
hot but he swallowed anyway. He could feel it burning all the way
down.
"That's three-twenty-five," said George, wrapping the sandwiches in
waxed paper. "Plus twenty five for the coffee, three-fifty."
The man turned back to look at the paper bag of sandwiches. "You got
quarters, Al?"
Al paid and the men left. Oedipa came out from the bathroom, behind
the counter opposite the door. She sat on the stool next to Ambrose.
"Don't look now, don't turn around. Those guys are The Killers,"
Ambrose said. "We're lucky, they're Florida guys and don't know me. I
bet they know what you look like, though."
She took their coffee and sandwiches across to a booth. She motioned
for Ambrose to sit on the same side of the booth, to make it more
difficult for George the counterman to overhear.
"OK, um, Ambrose," she said. Here's the deal. So, they're after me,
I've gotta get to Sault Ste. Marie and across to Canada. I'll pay you
to drive me there."
"Nope, no, no Soo. I've got a powerboat in Deer Park. We'll go across
the Lake to Batchawana Bay. And you'll pay, all right."
"Whatever you want." She dropped her spoon into her coffee. "Can we
leave now?"
As they walked along the road to where the Hummer was hidden, Ambrose
pursued his questions. "Start by getting real with me. No forked
tongue with Indian!"
Oedipa sighed, cleared her throat and began. "Get in, start the car.
I'll be right there."
As the engine turned over, the passenger door opened. Ambrose barely
turned to see her. Then he heard a startling new voice. "This is real.
The real is Achmed Oedipus bin Maas. I was sent here to stop Sirenia.
In my laptop here is enough to send Venison-and you, if you're not
straight with me-to hell."
"Hey, no need for threats, ok." I'm here, right, saving your ass? I'm
taking you to Canada, right?"
"No, I'm saving your ass. Deer Park is out; they already know you'd
go there. We're going to Newberry, and my associates will be waiting
in Lake Superior Forest. Hit the road, Ambrose."
 
The reader is here instructed to imagine these two as if they
were principal characters in Ernest Hemingway's various stories
about Nick Adams, principally in In Our
Time and Men Without Women.
Pretend "The Killers" is modified to the present episode about
the pursuit.
Pretend "Big Two-Hearted River" is an idyll in the escape of
Ambrose and Achmed. Since the reader is undoubtedly going to be
successfully imaginative, it will be unnecessary to detail their
time in the woods.
Also pretend that they are Atala and Rene in the eponymous novel
by Chateaubriand that helped start the romantic revolution in
literature. This pretense will lend the present narrative-and, by
metonymic conjunction, the romantic novel in general--a same-sex
erotic charge.
Last, pretend that they embody but contradict the white/non-white
homo thematic of Leslie Fiedler's Love and Death
in the American Novel.
50 A Delightful and Needed Diversion
(provided by bloggers)
Wendell and Cass, two penguins at the New York Aquarium in Coney
Island, Brooklyn, live in a soap opera world of seduction and
intrigue. Among the 22 male and 10 female African black-footed
penguins in the aquarium's exhibit, tales of love, lust and betrayal
are the norm. These birds mate for life. But given the
disproportionate male-female ratio at the aquarium, some of the
females flirt profusely and dump their partners for single males with
better nests.
Wendell and Cass, however, take no part in these cunning schemes.
They have been completely devoted to each other for the last eight
years. In fact, neither one of them has ever been with anyone else,
says their keeper, Stephanie Mitchell.
But the partnership of Wendell and Cass adds drama in another way.
They're both male. That is to say, they're gay penguins.
This is not unusual. "There are a lot of animals that have same-sex
relations, it's just that people don't know about it," Mitchell said.
"I mean, Joe Schmoe on the street is not someone who's read all sorts
of biology books."
One particular book is helpful in this case. Bruce Bagemihl's Biological Exuberance,87
published in 1999, documents homosexual behavior in more than 450
animal species. The list includes grizzly bears, gorillas, flamingos,
owls and even several species of salmon.
"The world is, indeed, teeming with homosexual, bisexual and
transgendered creatures of every stripe and feather," Bagemihl writes
in the first page of his book. "From the Southeastern Blueberry Bee of
the United States to more than 130 different bird species worldwide,
the 'birds and the bees,' literally, are queer."
In New York, it's the penguins.
At the Central Park Zoo, Silo and Roy, two male Chinstrap penguins,
have been in an exclusive relationship for four years. Last mating
season, they even fostered an egg together.
"They got all excited when we gave them the egg," said Rob Gramzay,
senior keeper for polar birds at the zoo. He took the egg from a
young, inexperienced couple that hatched an extra and gave it to Silo
and Roy. "And they did a really great job of taking care of the chick
and feeding it."
Of the 53 penguins in the Central Park Zoo, Silo and Roy are not the
only ones that are gay. In 1997, the park had four pairs of homosexual
penguins. In an effort to increase breeding, zookeepers tried to
separate them by force. They failed, said Gramzay.88
* * *
Elsewhere, a female ape wraps her legs around another
female, "rubbing her own clitoris against her partner's while emitting
screams of enjoyment." The researcher explains: It's a form of
greeting behavior. Or reconciliation. Possibly food-exchange behavior.
It's certainly not sex. Not lesbian sex. Not hot lesbian sex.
Six bighorn rams cluster, rubbing, nuzzling and mounting
each other. "Aggressosexual behavior," the biologist explains. A way
of establishing dominance.
They've been keeping it from us: There are homosexual
and bisexual animals, ranging from charismatic megafauna like mountain
gorillas to cats, dogs and guinea pigs. There are transgendered
animals, transvestite animals (who adopt the behavior of the other
gender but don't have sex with their own), and animals who live in
bisexual triads and quartets.
Bruce Bagemihl spent 10 years scouring the biological literature for
data on alternative sexuality in animals to write Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality and Natural
Diversity, 768 pages about exactly what goes on at "South Park's"
Big Gay Al's Big Gay Animal Sanctuary. The first section discusses
animal sexuality in its many forms and the ways biologists have tried
to explain it away. The second section, "A Wondrous Bestiary,"
describes unconventional sexuality in nearly 200 mammals and birds --
orangutans, whales, warthogs, fruit bats, chaffinches.89
* * *
It is a fundamental Darwinian principle that traits and behaviours
cannot spread over evolutionary time if they reduce an individual's
personal reproductive success. To be more precise, an imaginary
species consisting only of individuals with an exclusive and life-long
homosexual behaviour will be extinct in one generation.
Parthenogenetic (virgin birth) species do exist in nature, they
consist of 100% females, but a 100% homosexual species has never been
found. Such a species cannot exist. Just as a sterile species cannot
exist. What does exist in nature are species with up to 10 percent of
homosexuals, according to Bagemihl. But even this is a puzzle. If
those individuals do not reproduce, evolution theory predicts that the
percentage in the population must decrease continuously down to a
level that is produced by new mutations. But we observe more than
that. So how should the excess be explained? One possibility is
bisexuality, the combination of homosexual and heterosexual behaviour
in the same individual. But this cannot be the answer either, because
bisexual individuals will produce on average less progeny than
full-time heterosexuals. So the existence is still unexplained.
Bagemihl skilfully demolishes a variety of explanations for
homosexuality proposed by biologists. This is one of the best, and
interesting parts of his book. Probably few people have the
encyclopaedic knowledge of homosexual behaviour in animals to be able
to refute the variety of hypotheses to explain (away) homosexuality.
In the end Bagemihl concludes, somewhat surprisingly, that
homosexuality has no function, it just is.
Homosexual behaviour has an intrinsic value.90
51 Can I Get A Witness
(12 Nov Kenya Times) Witnesses say the girl's body levitated up
toward the ceiling, 'Her knees were bent upwards, her legs still
spread apart, her arms falling limp behind her, as the sterile drape
slipped off and slithered to the floor,' reported a surgical nurse. "I
didn't have the opportunity to make my ritual incision," commented
Mrs. Adowe Kikuyu, a clan leader and indigenous medicine practitioner.
"Suddenly, the ceiling parted and she went to heaven," her aunt said,
sobbing. "It was a miracle-God called her to prevent my niece from
going under the knife in that godless custom. I don't know what my
sister and brother-in-law were thinking, to make the girl go through
with such a thing in this day and age.' The doctor in charge was not
available to speak with The Times."
Cyril put down the Kenya Times and chortled a
little in his glee. "Well, Vyv," he said, "we've done it. By now
she'll be in the air heading to Paris and on her way to the Hotel Real
Desert."
"Caprice Sithole will make sure she's all right," added Vyvyan. "And
it's time we got back there too. I hope the little baby is still
alive, as we can be very helpful to her now, I think."
What a happy reunion they all made back at the Hotel. Caprice
prepared a magnificent meal of vegan blood-less black pudding, which
their new guest found acceptable but odd, and all toasted to success.
Cy and Vyv spent an hour before dinner conferring with MonaLisa and
Novy, who appeared much assured by the conversation. Timmy, relieved
to be home, shouted "God bless us, every one!"
But not everyone was as blessed as Timmy might have wished. He
learned that Herr Siegfried was still missing, presumably in Germany
somewhere, and as for Joseph, well , Joseph had been unmasked as an
impostor just after leaving Dubai. Apparently, an operative of World
Security Operations had been transformed through complicated cosmetic
surgery and planted to spy on them all,.
Vyvyan said tartly, "He was discovered when he was found to have no
recollection of the chord changes in 'Sophisticated Lady.' The bad
news, however, is that the real Joseph has disappeared."
"No, I'm afraid not," Neddy interjected. "Look at this news from
Fox-Europe."
There on the television was Joseph, manacled, his legs in shackles,
being led off an airplane in Chicago, Illinois. The Attorney General
was then shown announcing that a long-time fugitive, undoubtedly
connected with international terrorism, had been caught and extradited
back to face murder charges in the US. The AG thanked Mr. (formerly
Colonel) Oliver South for his work in apprehending "this white-hating,
cop-maiming monster."
The BBC featured Kenya news as well. The winner of the Nobel Peace
Prize was announced to be Wangari Maathai, a Kenyan activist who
"founded an Africa-wide movement that empowered women, confronted
corrupt officials and planted millions of trees in ravaged forestland.
"Never mind that she thinks AIDS is a man-made plague to kill
Africans," sneered Caprice. "Sadly, she's right for all the wrong
reasons. "It's killing us, and the conspiracy is among the rich
nations (too selfish) and the poor nations (too corrupt) to pay for
medical care. And we have the Catholics and the Protestants, who can't
agree on anything, united in condemning people for their sexuality. I
spit on Mugabe, and Nujoma and all of those fools!"
"Mama," her daughter Xoliswa cried. "It's because of the history of
colonialism. Kenya and Zimbabwe have the same problem with whites
robbing us of our land. And Christian values are what we need. All the
Highlanders football stars are Christian now."
"Ugh," Neddy grunted. "My uncle was a Reverend, but he would never
have acted like Mugabe. And he would have negotiated better land
deals. He's just whipping up poor farm laborers to riot because he
won't fight the agribusiness giants that own all the land. Same as in
Kenya."
"Affairs in Zimbabwe are our task, Neddy, not the children's. They
are practically French by now," said Caprice, bending her husband's
elbow to bring the champagne glass to his lips again. In attempting to
turn the gathering back toward festivity, she urged everyone, "Let's
leave political strategies for another day. Look, we have little Timmy
back, Cy and Vyv are well, our new niece was saved from cutting. And I
hear there may even be hope for Little Baby Nell."
"Heavens," invoked Vyvyan, "we have to appreciate our small victories
and work to expand the power of the multitude. That remains our
mission. I expect we'll soon hear from some friends with news of Lemmy
and Achmed as well. I for one will breathe an effeminate sigh of
relief when this go-round is over and we can move on to new
adventures."
52 December 4 is the anniversary of the killing of Fred
Hampton.
Fred Hampton, chairman of the Illinois chapter of the
Black Panther Party, was killed on 12/4/1969 at the age of 21. He was
one of the targets of Cointelpro, the FBI's secret
counter-intelligence program.
Instead of the usual chapter of The Story Continues,
readers are asked to consider the following two important items.
1. The following article (excerpted from a much longer
article that can be read at the url cited at the end of this excerpt)
outlines some recent Federal counter-intelligence operations.
newswire: Press Clipping 
25-Oct-04 23:51
Legal & Judicial  | Surveillance/Harassment
The new COINTELPRO
author: Camille T. Taiara
The feds are spying on ñ and harassing ñ political activists with a
fury not seen since the 1960s.
EARLY THIS MONTH the federal government launched the latest crude
offensive in its so-called war on terror. Titled the October Plan, the
program called for "aggressive ñ even obvious ñ surveillance" of a
wide range of individuals (regardless of whether or not they're
suspected of any criminal wrongdoing) until the Nov. 2 presidential
election, according to an internal document leaked to the press.
The plan ñ a collaboration between the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, and other agencies
ñ involves renewed scrutiny of mosques and interrogations of people
whose national origin, religious faith, or political leanings might,
in the eyes of the feds, indicate even the most far-flung relationship
to "terrorism."
Immigrants and others interviewed by the FBI have been "questioned
about immigration status ñ theirs and others' ñ and about their
political and religious views," the National Lawyers Guild's Stacey
Tolchin said at an emergency press conference called by the San
Francisco branch of the American Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee,
the Bay Area Association of Muslim Lawyers, the NLG, and the American
Civil Liberties Union of Northern California.
For staffers at these organizations, responding to these kinds of
crackdowns has become alarmingly routine. This is the fifth round of
FBI "informal interviews" targeting immigrants based on their national
origin, religion, and, increasingly, their political views.
No one knows just how many have been deported as a result of the
interviews or of the various dragnets conducted over the past three
years. Local NLG attorney Nancy Hormachae reported that at least
13,000 people were forced into deportation hearings as the result of
the notorious Special Registration program alone. And the fact that
none of these campaigns has proffered a single al-Qaeda operative
hasn't deterred the Bush administration a bit.
So far, immigrant Muslims and those from the Middle East and Central
Asia have suffered the brunt of the Bush administration's attacks on
civil liberties. But as NLG immigration attorney Mark Van Der Hout
told me, "Going after immigrants is just the first step towards going
after U.S. citizens."
Indeed, a look at the past three years shows that Attorney General
John Ashcroft's offensive has widened to include a range of citizens
whose only real crime is their opposition to the Bush administration's
policies.
The FBI comes calling
President George W. Bush, Aschroft, and company have made it easier
to spy on everyday citizens without probable cause of criminal
activity, even allowing for the indefinite detention of Americans
dubbed "enemy combatants," without charges or access to a lawyer.
They've eviscerated laws meant to keep a wall between the CIA and the
FBI and erected an extensive domestic-spying infrastructure, enlisting
private citizens and relying on private industry to a degree never
seen before. Today federal agencies are maintaining a grand total of
10 domestic watch lists.
The Bush administration has shifted federal funding away from
traditional law enforcement and toward domestic spying, explained John
Crew, an attorney with the ACLU of Northern California specializing in
police practices and surveillance issues. "A lot of this activity is,
in fact, being carried out by local police working with the Joint
Terrorism Task Force," he told me, explaining that those agents are
considered "federalized." They report to the FBI. Local city officials
ñ even local police chiefs ñ are often not aware of what these
"special officers" are doing.
As the Bush administration loosened professional standards for law
enforcement, it simultaneously increased financial incentives for
conducting surveillance, Crew continued. "To qualify for grants,
[local law enforcement] must have organizations in their locale that
are threats," he said. "They have to justify their own budget by
amplifying the threat factor."
。. elision of many examples of spying on activists]
Civil liberties watchdog groups obviously worry about the chilling
effect these kinds of surveillance and crackdowns have on our
faltering First and Fourth Amendments. But they also insist that
Ashcroft and company's approach isn't making us any safer.
When law enforcement fails to distinguish between violent criminal
activity and legitimate dissent ñ and when it favors collecting as
much information on as many people as possible rather than useful
intelligence resulting from bona fide criminal investigations ñ it's
"choosing quantity over quality," Crew said. "You develop good leads
by generating trust, not by disrespecting people's right.  [And] if
you're looking for a needle in a haystack, adding more hay doesn't
help any."
The bills that have recently passed through the House and Senate in
response to the 9-11 Commission's findings, reorganizing intelligence
gathering and expanding Big Brother's reach even further into our
everyday lives, just promise more of the same.
"It's during times of fear when civil liberties are most at risk,"
Crew said.
Research assistance provided by A.C. Thompson.
source url:
http://www.sfbg.com/39/03/cover_anniversary_cointelpro.html
2. The Center for Constitutional Rights is organizing
efforts to bring the US to trial for war crimes in the matter of the
Abu Ghraib prisoners.
Call on the German Federal Prosecutor to Investigate Rumsfeld and
Other U.S. Officials for War Crimes at Abu Ghraib
The Center for Constitutional Rights and four Iraqis who were
tortured in U.S. custody have filed a complaint with the German
Federal Prosecutor's Office against high ranking United States
civilian and military commanders over the abuses at Abu Ghraib prison
and elsewhere in Iraq.
We are asking the German prosecutor to launch an investigation: since
the U.S. government is unwilling to open an independent investigation
into the responsibility of these officials for war crimes, and since
the U.S. has refused to join the International Criminal Court, CCR and
the Iraqi victims have brought this complaint in Germany as a court of
last resort. Several of the defendants are stationed in Germany.
Defendants include Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, former
CIA Director George Tenet, Lt. General Ricardo S. Sanchez,
Major-General Walter Wojdakowski, Brig.-General Janis Karpinski,
Lt.-Colonel Jerry L. Phillabaum, Colonel Thomas M. Pappas, Lt.-Colonel
Stephen L. Jordan, Major-General Geoffrey Miller, and Undersecretary
of Defense for Intelligence Stephen Cambone.
German law allows German courts to prosecute for killing, torture,
cruel and inhumane treatment, forcible transfers and sexual coercion
such as occurred at Abu Ghraib. The world has seen the photographs and
read the leaked "torture memos" - we are doing what is necessary when
other systems of justice have failed and seeking to hold officials up
the chain of command responsible for the shameful abuses that
occurred.
Please join our effort! The German Prosecutor has discretion to
decide whether to initiate an investigation. It is critical that he
hear from you so he knows that people around the world support this
effort.
Please go to their website
http://www.ccr-ny.org/v2/whatsnew/action/actionAlert2.asp
and sign on to a letter to support this action.
Thank you for your attention.
F
Chap 53 Some Convergences
Achmed grabbed Ambrose at the shoulder of his coat and pulled so that
they were sitting very close together, each able to look over the
other's shoulder to monitor any approach. "We're here, " he whispered.
"No unnecessary moves or sounds, ok? Handguns only, although I don't
think we'll need them."
"So what do we do now?" Ambrose asked. "We've had no lights, no radio
or cel contact, and silence for the last three hours.
"Yeah, pretty peaceful, eh?" He pulled off his watch and told
Ambrose, "Make sure everything is turned off, no electronics, no
metal, no plastic, no nothing."
Achmed made a pile of all their gear, and led them about 10 meters
closer toward the lake. He started to take off his left boot and
whispered to Ambrose, Take off all your clothes; strip down, nude,
nothing., Just lie back with your arms open."
Ambrose did what he was told, but "Damn," he thought; "danger is a
turn-on, but I am not going to let this guy fuck me out here-on the
run, get my ass froze off or shot off."
"Don't think about it, just do it," he was told. "It's snowing, it's
getting dark, and it's the only way we can get picked up by the infra
red sensors."
Not even a minute later tracer bullets flew over them, streaking
toward the lake in the thickening snowfall.
"Don't get up," as if Ambrose wouldn't think of getting up, but it
did cross his mind to raise his head and steal a look at Achmed, just
to check on what kind of toolkit the guy was operating with.
Achmed yelled now over the gunfire. and there came the very welcome
sound of a camo-white Kiowa OH-58D91, lobbing
rockets into the treeline as it swooped down between the unseen
pursuers and our heroes A & A.
In a matter of seconds, somebody had bundled up the two naked men and
strapped them into the helicopter. As they rose and headed out north
over Lake Superior, a parting round of rocket fire threw a humvee into
the air behind them, its occupants catapulted up flaming and then down
hissing in the snow.
On board the Kiowa, a female in what was obviously flight gear but
exhibiting no identification, wrapped Achmed and Ambrose in thermal
blankets and started iv drips to rehydrate them, pushing in a dose of
ativan to calm frayed nerves, but instructing them to be conscious of
long, slow breaths. Satisfied with their vital signs, she left them to
drift a while; both were quiet for what seemed to be quite a long
time, until the same female reappeared with a clipboard and a cel
phone.
"Printed here is a timetable I am instructed to share with you. It
details certain activities by persons you are acquainted with or that
you will otherwise find relevant. The phone is programmed to put you
in touch with the persons who contracted for this operation. They are
waiting to speak with you." Ambrose was surprised when she handed the
phone to him.
When he pushed the talk button and heard a voice say his name,
Ambrose was surprised again. He was talking not to Venison, whom he
had expected to hear gloating after re-capturing them. Instead the
voice seemed British and cheerful. "Well, well, " it said, "good
Indian. I expect you wonder what has happened, and who we are who are
whisking you away."
"Yes, I am, " answered Ambrose. "I gather you are on Achmed's team,"
he said, looking over at the man who had turned the tables on him,
switch-hitting; first a damsel in distress Ambrose was saving from
Sirenia, now a man with powerful connections who turned around and
saved Ambrose.
"Yes, you could say that, " said the voice on the phone. "Achmed is a
highly-skilled and very valuable asset to our team. You could say he's
the David Beckham of the gender expression team."
"Ok, I guess. I don't know who that is, and I don't know who you are.
What is going on here? Where are we going?"
"My name is Vyvyan. I'm going to leave it to Achmed to answer most of
those questions. For now, I'll just say congratulations on your
resourcefulness. You are safe now, in good hands I promise you. And
you are going, after a few stops, to Argentina. It's summer there now,
so I expect you'll enjoy it. Now will you please give the phone to
Achmed? Cheerio!"
From a hotel room in Torquay, Vyvyan spoke to Achmed while Cyril read
from the laptop screen about a product line in unmanned airborne
vehicles.
"Welcome to this year's Shephard's UV North America Conference and
Exhibition. Last year we reviewed Transformation in Action. This year
we
examine an extension of this philosophy entitled Global Persistent
Surveillance (GPS). This unique and new warfighting concept
underpins the massive reorganisation and new initiatives impacting
both
the operational and intelligence community capabilities. The nature
of the
threat and the tempo of operations demand a radical departure from
the
way we have managed information flows, shared products and provided
'actionable information' to the warfighter. 
Due to the world-wide global set of threats and the new terrorist
threat
paradigm, GPS is a national imperative for both national and tactical
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) systems.  UAVs
represent an efficient and effective solution to provide a 'cursor'
over a
target under any conditions and at any location.  This year we
rightly
focus on GPS for our conference because of the critical role UAVs
will
play in making GPS a successful strategy.  Again welcome to
Shephard's UV North America 2004. 92ì
Chap 54 Our Man in KL
Medium shot: a food stand on Jl. Petaling, Chinatown night market in
Kuala Lumpur. Lighting is dim, from a naked low-wattage bulb overhead.
A vendor dishes spicy noodles into bowls for customers lined up on the
sidewalk. A family is sitting on the ground at a low table, passing
dishes around. The men wear t-shirts above their sarongs, while the
women, in blouses and skirts, all wear scarves on their heads, pinned
just below their chins. The camera pans slowly and reveals a man in
western clothing slurping noodles。
"Hey, what's he doing there? Go back, get that white guy out of the
shot. Oh, fuck it, cut! Cut!"
A continuity person rushes up to say, "I'm sorry sir. Do you speak
English? Yes, well, we've rented this stand for the next two days.
You'll have to eat somewhere else." He reports back to the director,
Oliver Stonehenge, noted for his films RFK, Battalion and Natural Born
Maimers. Stone is in a down patch of his career and is in Malaysia
shooting footage for a Singapore-financed cheapie about the bombings
in Bali. For reasons of tourist confidence, he has not been allowed to
blow up sidewalks in Bali itself and has instead set up shop in KL.
The man who was moved out of the food stall takes his bowl and moves
next door to another stand. He sits down and continues to eat.
Although deemed undesirable by Stonehenge, he is important to readers
of this story; he is Lemmy Caution, last seen in Chapter 31.
Lemmy has walked around the city all evening after an excruciating
meeting with Malay Exotics, SA, Inc. at the Petronas Twin Towers. He
took off his white turban about an hour ago and is now carrying it in
a Starbucks Merdeka Square-KL paper bag, hoping nobody from Sirenia
has followed him. He needs to clear his head after three hours in
which his ostensible colleagues from the cult competed with the
import-export people (actually smugglers of exotic animals and animal
products) for dominance, each with the aim to manipulate the other
with the most subtle and insulting deviousness. Malaysia has a complex
history of conflict where the Malaysian Chinese have suffered the
xenophobic odium of native Malays and the Malays have resisted the
acumen and the power of the Chinese in the economic and cultural
spheres, particularly under the racist colonial policies of Great
Britain, policies that still rankle although more than 70% of
Malaysians can claim mixed European and Asian heritage.
Lemmy, who is nominally a consultant for Sirenia, has chafed at the
insistence that he adopt for the duration of the contract the Sirenian
strictures on costume, diet and celibacy. At today's meeting Lemmy and
two female Sirenians were attempting to finalize a deal in which they
would purchase a live dugong, a purchase that is illegal under
Malaysian law and international protocols on the preservation of
endangered species. The animal, allegedly orphaned in the wild
although undoubtedly from its only remaining habitats around Gunung
Kinabulu Park in Sabah. was to be paid for in ringgits, the local
currency. Trading in Malaysia has become legendary for the bewildering
and profitable rapidity of calculations of ringgits and yuan, dollars
and now euros.
If the Sirenians and not Stonehenge were writing the script:
Talking-head shot, widening to shot of an office sumptuously
appointed with 15th C. Chinese paintings, silk
rugs, a shining conference table made of rare bohdi tree wood. The
speaker, in a slightly dated Gautier epauletted mao suit, with a
semi-military fragrance, is shown to be talking to three persons in
white tunics and white turbans, in a scene that owes too much to
orientalizing pictures like Shanghai Express
and The Letter. Mr. Ibrahim Hahathir of Malay
Exotics, having abandoned his opening price of 7.6 million ringgits
(3.80 ringgits = 1 US dollar) is now offering to deliver the "big
fishie."
Hahathir: "Dear mystical friends, we understand that some
unscrupulous individuals can
be persuaded to bring this magnificent beast to the dock at KL for a
mere 4.5 million," he says smiling, offering exquisite oolong tea to
his guests.
The women shake their white turbans to say no, but Lemmy accepts.
Lemmy: "How can we trust these unspeakable criminals to assure us the
animal is
healthy?"
H: "Oh, our expert veterinary staff will of course be on available to
you for a thorough
examination. And for a nominal cost, we can even find shippers who
will cross the Pacific and bring it directly to a port on the West
Coast of the US. "
He hands Lemmy a tiny cup carved of rhino horn, containing a barely
lip-moistening droplet of the rarest tea in the world. Lemmy takes the
cup but refuses the powdered opium Mr. Hahathir offers to scoop into
his cup with a repellently long fingernail on his pinky.
L: "Of course, a sound animal will require very special treatment en
route."
One of the Sirenians, who have been expecting this ploy regarding
trans-oceanic shipment, hastens to say,
Sirenian: "Oh no, honored child of the eastern sea dragons, we will
undertake the
shipping. It's safer for us."
A palpable chill passes through the room at this maladroit refusal.
Mr. Hahathir, turning to his teapot, sighs,
H: "I cannot countenance the remotest possibility that you and your
cargo might undergo
risk from the notorious pirates because of our negligence. Despite
the risks a foreigner might face, we were prepared to make certain the
precious creature arrived。 alive?
Script notes by Quentin Quiet-noted treatment development reader for
Mirromax Films
What is most visible here is the severely narrowed operational scope
of the Sirenians, who suffer from too much early viewing of films
depicting Wily Oriental Gentlemen (viz, the
origin in English colonialism of this term).
Suffice it, for the plot, to say that the Sirenians greedily offer up
to US$ 2 million, knowing that a conglomerate of dentists in Marin
County will pay three to see the live dugong swimming in the tank of
their office. Little do they know that the Pirate Queen, a beautiful
and ruthless young Malay woman (bearing a suspiciously plagiaristic
similarity to a Pirate Queen in a film cribbed from a book entitled
Your LIFE Story by someone else) determined to protect her heritage,
will interfere with their plans.
This script could be a smash: Criticality meets Ironic Distance meets
Denise Darcel in Flame of Calcutta.
The real question is whether Lemmy Caution's secret mission will be
successful, which will require at some point that his secret mission
be disclosed to the reader.
55 Skeleton Key to The Story Continues
An electronic serial novel, The Story
Continues. includes fiction, poetry, parody, pastiche,
pornography (n.b.) philosophy, physics, psychoanalysis, plagiarism.
The story has a queer leftist orientation: stylistically it's All My Children mysteriously meet Gargantua and Pantagruel.
The Story begins in The Hotel Real Desert (cf.
Zizek on The Matrix), just outside of
EuroDisney, where many curious and colorful characters are staying.
They are
Cyril Burst and Vyvyan, Lord Throbbing (cf. Wilde, Firbank) two
ageing British queens who run a foundation to rescue sex-variant
children;
Herr Siegfried Rheinfahrt (cf. Wagner, Weil, Brecht) a former
anti-Nazi communist, bureaucrat in the GDR, now a cynical addict
to opiates;
Joseph Jamaal, an avant-garde jazz musician, now a political
exile in Europe, accused of terrorism in the US, who is
Rheinfahrt's valet;
Caprice and Neddy Sithole (cf. Achebe's novels), the cook and
major domo of the hotel, political refugees from Zimbabwe who
operate an underground network of African resistance fighters
throughout the "Dark" Continent, financed by the Napkin Ring;
Oedipa/us Achmed bin Maas, a transgendered, shape-shifting Iraqi
whose mission is to infiltrate and destroy oppressive cults and
political formations;
Lemmy Caution (cf. Godard), an American alcoholic and leftist in
recovery, long-time comrade of Achmed;
MonaLisa and Novy, a lesbian couple with two daughters, one of
whom is murdered in the first scene of The Story;
Countess Karen Blitzen Yousopoff, the stick-thin aristocrat who
directs public relations for the World Trade Organization and
functions as a liason to many paramilitary groups;
Col. Oliver South, USMC ret., a born-again Christian whose
still-vital connections with power have landed him a position as
the world's top anti-terrorist mercenary, head of World Security
Operations, Inc, ;
Tim Tilden, the great-nephew of notorious and brilliant gay
tennis star of the 1920's, Big Bill Tilden, a young albino
African-American adopted by the Sitholes;
The Baby (once mistakenly named Little Nell-cf. Dickens),
daughter of MonaLisa, who is electrocuted and lies near death,
thinking thoughts about consciousness and cognitive development, a
la Piaget;
There are currently 54 chapters of The Story Continue。 An
archive of the whole novel so far is at The Story
Continues website
Each week a new chapter of the serial is emailed. If you want to read
it as it should be read, just reply to this email with "I want to
read" in the subject heading. You will be added to the mailing list.
Readers are also invited to contribute narratives, comments on the
themes and issues, or anything they like that relates to The Story Continues。 A link on the website
is provided for that purpose.
56 As the World Turns
Mrs. Ima Caution
1789 Rue Marat
Quebec, Quebec, Canada
Cher Maman Greetings from Phuket!
Happy Holidays from this paradise in Thailand. I came here the day
before yesterday (day before Xmas) for a little holiday. The beach is
beautiful and all people are so friendly. I can't walk down the beach
in my thong without somebody yelling a cheerful "Thai boy here!"
There's a cute little elephant named NingNong that carries a little
girl on its back. It must be young, as it is only a little taller than
its owner/trainer. The little girl has ridden every day, and says Ning
Nong is her best friend. Most of the tourists here are from
Europe-lots of families but a good sprinkling of singles as well. Not
tawdry like Kuta, either. I am glad to be out of KL (see Chap 54) for
a week or two, as my assignment there is stalled while we wait for
permission to export goods.
I miss you, ma cherie, but I do not regret missing the snow up in
Quebec. I'll write more soon.
Ton fils,
Lemmy
FOX News 12/28/04
Elephant saves little girl in tsunami
(shot of elephant and Thai man on beach)
NingNong, an asian elephant that works on the beach at Phuket is
credited by a little English girl with saving her life in the tsunami.
The little girl, whose name is Edwina Drood, (shot of girl) says she
and NingNong had seen each other every day for the previous three
weeks, and she was spending her last day on the beach yesterday before
departing for home.
As the wall of water crashed toward the beach, many birds and animals
reacted more quickly than humans. Ning Nong apparently searched the
beach, found Edwina, and carried her on his back to higher ground.
(Shot of Edwina saying) "He saved me! He really loves me!"
Her family have agreed to send Ning Nong and his owner/trainer Mr.
Chittalongcorn 25 euros a month for care and food.
(shot of dogs running on beach) This is not the only story of animal
heroism here in Phuket. A dog is said to have herded a little boy who
was running toward the water back to his family in the nick of time,
exhibiting the shepherd instinct in his breeding.
Bitta Root, reporting for Fox News Phuket
from: Bröderbund Men's Shelter
Frankfurt, Deutschland
December 27, 2004
To: Herr Josef Jamaal
Hotel Real Desert, Paris, Frankenland
Dear Josef,
Where are you? Are you well.? I have heard nothing from you. I am
almost in prison here. I was made to suffer all the hells of
detoxification from my morphine, and I miss you. I came to Frankfurt
to see my old comrade, (see Chap 46) but she made me leave after two
days. I had no money, no clothes, no nothing and I am desolate. I had
a whole day when I thought or dreamed I lived in Köln in 1200, a
member of the Brotherhood of the Free Spirit.
All my dreams for the future are long gone; the fascists are rising
again all over the world. The US has become the new 1000 year Reich
and wants to annex Iraq, Iran, Korea, everything. Resistance is futile
for an old man like me. I am so lonely. Can you please come and help
me?
LETTER RETURNED TO SENDER-NOT AT THIS ADDRESS -CONTACT US DEPT OF
STATE FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
US BOP inspected correspondence
Chicago Metropolitan Correctional Center
Chicago, IL, USA
Addressee: Herr Siegfried Rheinfahrt
Hotel Real Desert, Paris, France
Inmate: Joseph Jamaal HiSec#579586
Date: December 27, 2004
Herr Rheinfahrt,
I was apprehended by US Marshals and brought back to the US. (see
Chap 51) I am in prison, facing charges of terrorism from 1971. You
may remember that when I fled through Algeria, Eldridge Cleaver
denounced me and said I never did anything to help the Black
Liberation Army. But that does not satisfy the Justice Dept. There is
a small committee of people supporting me, and the Populist Legal
Agency is defending me. The political climate in this country has
changed so much. The liberals are the most craven cowards. Can you
please come and help me?
LETTER RETURNED TO SENDER-NOT AT THIS ADDRESS
Found in the pocket of Siegfried Rheinfahrt
Brothers and Sisters,
We, the last remnants of the Catharists here in Frankish lands (see
Chap 29), face persecution from Bernard of Clairvaux. In particular,
the women have been seized and burned as witches-all part of the
male-supremacist purge of women's leadership in spreading the real,
revolutionary93 news of the gospels. The dog,
"saintly" Bernard, has denounced the theological position that God is
immanent, insisting that God is totally transcendent and that humaan
aspiration to unite with God can be fulfilled only after death.
Margery Kempe and others have roundly defeated this argument, but the
Church cannot face a congregation that understands The Knowledge of
Good and Evil.
We call on future generations to help us. In the future, we forsee a
huge peasant rebellion, caused by widespread dispossession of land
tilled by residents and sparked by a new reformation of religion. We
also forsee an overthrow of the ancien regime and the establishment of
the idea of rights inherent in each individual person. Sadly, we
expect that one superpower will tie reformation theology and
ficticious "rights" into a license to rule the world. Martyrdom is our
only option n
[Here the text is broken and nothing is legible except one phrase:
CAVE AT THE POOL OF JUIQUEE JUACHAY]
 
Intergalactic Net Correspondence
From: Trzzz, Ethnobiologist on assignment (see Chaps 27-28), Planet 4
of Sol system, spiral galaxy 37584894395A-D49485839.
Esteemed Colleague(s) on Altair 4
Observation has grown problematic here at Chauvet, as compassionate
commitment to the humans arises. Over the last few centuries I watch
their bewilderment at the rapid growth of cerebral cortex and its
integration into two hemispheres. When the hemispheres were separate,
the humans took the voices in their heads to be communication from
gods. Now that the two hemispheres are bridged, they are so lonely,
realizing that the only voices they hear are their own. Can I bear to
watch them invent power hierarchies of gender, occupation, accumulated
wealth, religion or other devilments without acting to help them? Must
I? What about all our ethical strictures on action ethnobiology? We
cannot just watch suffering.
I have decided to invest in human minds, culminating around the 6th Century BCE, a set of realizations regarding
being and otherness, which should usher in a golden age of tranquility
and cooperation for the next 10,000 years.
Trzzz
57 Catching Up on Old Friends
dear Cousin Timmy
Happy Winter Solstice I have not heard from you in a long time.
I was promoted to eighth grade and I left Parker Tyler School for the
Young and Evil because (I think) my gym teacher cardinal Pirelli , is
afraid I will blab about how he dresses up like Saint Sebastian during
archery I never liked being in the basement anyway with those grisly
pinups of Mr. Yukio Mishima ( Pirelli says he used to be a japanese
teacher here but I think he's lying) and Mr. Derek Jarman.!!!)
So Tim what are up 2? CAN I COME VISIT YOU IN JUNE??? when school is
out.-- My mom says I can go anywhere -- she is busy with her new ugh!
Boyfriend (dirtball)
Yr cuz,
Temujin Genghis Khan Rabinowitz-DuBois94
8th grade, New Age Academy Inc.*
New Age Academy is a secure facility for boys and girls with ADD. We
are not responsible for any actions of students undergoing Ritalin or
other pharaceutical treatment.
++++++++++++++++++++
Where are they now?
Paris, France (AP)
Mlle. Terpsichore Prion the fetching winner of the Mlle. Disney World
Competition last year at EuroDisney95, was told
yesterday that she would have to submit frozen samples of her brain
and organ tissue immediately to the French National Bureau de Santé.
It is suspected that she contracted Mad Cow Disease (bovine
encephalopathy) while employed as a milkmaid at the Disney amusement
park.
"But they are mechanical, miniature cows!" expostulated Mlle. Prion
when contacted by our reporter. "This is obviously political
persecution for my totally legal support of the ELF Liberation Front."
"ELF Lib," as it is called by its adherents, is alleged to have
burned 45 Hummer vehicles last year in the parking lot of EuroDisney
and to have secreted a communiqué claiming their action was "Operation
Heraclitean Fire," for "little people of all ages," in a toadstool in
Swiss Miss Land. Mlle. Prion is an adult person of small stature, some
2'13" in height who was on daily exhibition in the Swiss Miss
environment.
"The woman is obviously paranoid," said Lt. Col. Oliver South (USMC
ret.), the head of World Security Operations, the private firm that
brought Prion to the attention of authorities. She was bound in a rug
and left in the lost and found at the Gare du Nord, say unidentified
agents of the Sureté. "We are grateful to Col. South," said the
agents, "but we question his tactics."
Found in Prion's small apartment were posters of famous "rap"
musicians, including MC Solaar, Lil' Bit, Lil' Kim, as well as a
letter addressed to the world music superstar Mobe 68. The letter, in
part:
Dear Wonderful Mobe 68,
You dot'n now me, but I am your biggest fan. You should not worry
about that fag (oops, sorry, my bad-I dot'n mean you.  Eminem. I mean
you should make him your bitch and that would clean his clock for him.
When are you going to sing in France I love you so much please send
me your underware.
XXXXOOOO
Terpsichore Prion
+++++++++++++++++++
 
Southeby's Auction Lot 239u837824
Reserve: 15,000 Euro
A Holographic Letter from George Eliot 96 to
Klara Kaligari97
15 December, 1857
Dear Laura,
How delightful to have yours of October last. And how is Siegfried
taking your new liason? During the meeting of the International
Movement for Zion last night, I was reminded of you. Someone mentioned
Husserl, who, I had forgotten, was himself a Jew but got himself
baptized. I searched Ideen and wrote this in
reaction:
The I-Beam
Husserl rightly points out that we are able to slide up and down the
pole of the ego-beam at will, moving now toward the thing, now away
from it to consider the act of knowing and its modalities. For
example, noematically I can consider a certain cat who probably
exists, but then I can turn back noetically to assess the degree of
certitude that characterizes my consideration of that selfsame cat as
existing (# 105). Now if we were to slide down to the point where all
modalities are behind us on the noetic side of the pole, and if there
we were to face the object, we would get the pure sense of the object
in which its unity is given.
My best to Rosa von Praunheim, that butch thing!
MaryAnn
+++++++++++++++++++++
message on the anwering machine of Ambrose Broussard98
"This is Ambrose. I am back in Manistique briefly. If this is a
Sirenian, do not communicate with me any more. Others can leave a
message but I am moving to London. My new email is abrou@merriengland.uk.
++++++++++++++++++++++
message to Ambrose
"It's Cyril! Hurry, Ambrose dear, and bring all your leatherstockings
and such. It is Panto season, and our young(ish) friend Ian MacKellin
is playing Mrs. Twankey. We are taking you to meet him the day after
you arrive. All despite being in black, mourning for poor Renata
Tebaldi, truly the voice of an angel now! We'll meet your plane at
Heathrow, dear. Have a safe flight."
58 If Time, Not Space; If Space, Not Time
In Islington, on a rainy Sunday night in January, Cyril, Vyvyan and
Ambrose emerge from the cinema, commenting on their disappointment
with What the Bleep.
99
"That film100 is nothing, dear boys," says Cyril,
"but an infomercial for a particular type of Buddhist thought, which
has seized on quantum mechanics as an explanation for their
theological concern with consciousness and the desire to shed "the
ego" in order to be at home in the new construal of the universe."
Willing to play the interlocutor (not unlike Alan Alda in science
programs on US public television), Ambrose asks, "but don't you agree
that matter is no longer to be thought of as solid and stable, and
that energy is what makes the universe?"
"Let's start more simply, " ripostes Cyril. "The film's expert-a
chiropractor, so he undoubtedly has the scientific background to
comment on this-tells us that functional MRIs show the same areas of
the brain are active when looking at, say, an apple as when
remembering an apple. He then says this indicates that the brain
cannot tell the difference between what is real and what is only
remembered. Therefore consciousness is constituting reality. That's
just bad science!"
Vyvyan sees his point: "First of all, the fMRI is not precise enough
to show that the very same neurons are active in both case. And
here's the car. Mind your umbrellas!
"Second, if I may second your searchlight brilliance dear Vyv," adds
Cyril, "the film assumes that consciousness and the brain are
coterminous, congruent. That leaves out the whole rest of the body,
including the eyes, the muscles that move the lenses in the eyes, the
skin of the hand that might hold the apple-everything else."
"Why yes, of course," muses Ambrose as the ancient Bentley coughs,
sneezes and is finally underway. "That means that the assertion about
consciousness constituting the world is not proven by that argument.
But what about the Heisenberg101 quote-'atoms are
not things'? We know from Bohr and others that the act of observation
changes phenomena: observing a subatomic particle can determine either
its location or its momentum, but not both. In fact, all we have are
probabilities for where any given particle is prior to observation: it
could be everywhere or nowhere.
"Theories abound, darlings, to explain this uncertainty principle,
but the purest is the Copenhagen consensus, right Cyril dear?" That
there is no thing, no entity we can call matter, or energy, or
reality. All we can do is ascertain probabilities, which do not
definitively prove anything is anywhere. "
Ambrose interjects, "For that matter, it doesn't disprove it either."
Cyril is more measured. "In fairness, Bohr's formulation102 that there is no thing called reality is not the
only way to see the universe. Einstein might still be right that God
does not play games. David Böhm103 sees implicate
order. Most scientists are agnostic on the question of whether there
is a "real" universe out there independent of our observation of it."
"The best that can be said is that observation (and we could stretch
and call that consciousness, I guess) is implicated in every
phenomenon we can observe and seemingly in every phenomenon we can
theorize to explain. Think of superstring theories and the like!"
"But this movie goes too far; it wants us to believe our
consciousness creates reality, which is conventionally Buddhist, but
it's bad Buddhist doctrine and bad science together. It's a mare's
nest of post-Kantian goo that is far to keen on idealism."
"Well, my Chingachgook, let us show you the good old Berkeleyan
reality of an English dinner. We'll go to an Indian restaurant for a
hot curry!"
"Not to go on about it," replies Ambrose, "but I was confused by the
discourse on addiction104 in the film. What did
you think of that?"
"Bah!" Vyvyan expostulates. We are told by that Elke Sommer
look-alike with beautiful skin and blue eyeshadow105 that everything we like or dislike is an addiction, but if
we take a hot bath, we are transformed and can throw away our anxiety
medications."
"They should rather have said," agrees Cyril, "that anti-depressants
are a logical outcome of theories that brain chemicals and electrical
connections among neurons are the seat of emotional reactions of
delight and distress. Readjustment of those electro chemicals is a
perfectly marvelous course to take, and even more so-a fortiori-- if
consciousness is all somehow quantum-based addiction chemistry?"
The Bentley pulls up on Finchley Road, in front of a popular Indian
eatery, The Indologist. "Let's eat! My addicted cells (another
falsehood that the cell is the basic unit of consciousness) want food
and a nice drinky."
59 Queer Crimes and Gay Globalization
"Look at this proposal," I said to Foucault's nephew (see Chap 11).
"I'd like you to comment on my ideas for the class I am teaching at
the Quan Yin Transgendered Bodhisattva Correspondence School and
OnLine University, Inc, S.A."
"OK," replied Marcel, but I warn you I have a perverse outlook on
these topics."
QUEER CRIME AND GAY GLOBALISM
Much of the life of lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, transgender,
genderqueer and intersex persons has been illegal, and this illegality
has been a constituent factor in the development of new sub-cultures,
economies and geographies. This course will examine some of the ways
that non/anti-normative sexual desire has created new modes of being
and responded to the Law that seeks to channel desire into acceptable
activities. Prostitution, pornography, inter-generational sex, drug
use, unsafe sex, sexual activity in public or private are "crimes"
said to characterize "queer" life. We will attempt to look at the
behaviors and beliefs of persons seeking sexual and emotional
connections and their outcomes in modes of being that both create
shared subjectivities and build institutions. These institutions have
challenged the structures of economic and social life, with resulting
transformation and incorporation into the globalization of the
marketplace. Queer outlaws are followed by LGBT entrepreneurs.
We will read from marxian and freudian commentators on queer desires
and queer cultures, including contemporaries like Foucault, Butler,
Bersani, Wittig, Beck Also, we examine the documentation of queer
legality and criminality in such works as Times
Square Red, Times Square Blue, Queer Diasporas, The Social
Construction of a Gay Drug, Resentment, The Crystal Diary, and Macho
Sluts. In addition, students will participate in original
research on sexual subcultures in this city and in other parts of the
world. Music, art, fashion, electronic communication and self-help
(among other processes) will be considered as QLGBT strategies to
create their lives and resist oppressio. 
Topics to be covered (partial list, needs expansion)
Crime and sin
Genderqueerness as crime
Non-hetero marriage as crime
AIDS as crime, public health as surveillance
Crimes in countries, cultures outside the US
Sexual tourism and gay travel business
Disco and the record business
Movies and tv
Pharmaceutical drug therapies and patent laws
Gay & lesbian jobs
Disability and work under the table,
Repentance strategies-AA, NA
New social places, non-places on the Internet
Protest movements and gay parades
Techno vs. deep house
Queer Punk
Gender change, laws and violence
Domestic violence
Expulsion of queer youth
Proportion of illegal stuff in economy
War on Drugs impact
Zoning laws
"Look here, Mr. Philosopher," said Marcel. "I will give you a whole
lecture on the phenomenon of Gay Crystal, about which I, as an
advanced European in touch with the latest drug-resistant AIDS scare,
know something from my frequent and promiscuous contacts with New
Yorkers and Los Angelenos. Consider the following an outline of my
talk:
General use of crystal
Use of crystal for sex
Communication via sex lines and internet
Use of crystal for clubs, etc
Club scene
Club fashion
Advertising
Health Issues
"And then I will perform a disquisition on the Gay Circuit Party,
touching on
Employment: DJs, bartenders, dancers, waiters, actors, singers, etc.
Products
National centers, travel
International
Impact on locals
Impact of locals on circuit
"What do you make of that, Mr. Philosopher?"
"As always, Marcel, I am impressed by your perspicuity," I had to
reply.
"And," added my addled friend, "I have a whole idea about the history
of queer culture. How's this?
Class Proposal Queer Cultures of the 60s and 70s
In this multimedia course, we will examine the Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, Transgender--Queer cultural efflorescence that is dated from
the street riots of 1969 around the Stonewall Inn in New York. The
origins of this cultural movement in Cold War economics and politics
and the emergence of vibrant social movements of African-Americans,
Latinos, Women and youth can be glimpsed through documentary film and
the "underground" press of the times: Chicago Seed, Berkeley Barb, RAT, and East Village Other.
In literary production, specifically gay male writing begins with
Robert Duncan in his 1949 "Manifesto" and Ginsberg in "Howl;" both
became icons to 60s gay poets. Most prominent New York poets were
Frank O'Hara, James Merrill and James Schuyler. Lesbian writers like
Elizabeth Bishop, Anne Sexton and Muriel Rukeyser were already well
established, and were joined by feminist/bisexual Beats and emerging
post-Stonewall writers like Robin Morgan and Audre Lord.
In theater Gay/Lesbian/Transgender writers and performers were
particularly visible. The high camp of the Theater of the Ridiculous
and the anti-war hippie rock dramas of the pan-sexual Fugs will be
looked at in early film and recordings of these performances, as well
as films by Andy Warhol, whose decidedly "queer" Factory was the most
significant cultural producer of the second half of the century.
Far from the New York irony of Warhol were the poetry of Duncan, Jack
Spicer, Judy Grahn and Pat Parker. The gender-smashing antics of the
Cockettes in San Francisco exemplify the collectively-made, often
anonymous projects that contributed to the development of the
gathering as an art form--beyond the Happening lay the Be-In and drag
ritual. Writer/performers and film artists necessary to understanding
this aesthetic are Jack Smith, Kenneth Anger, and documentarians of
demonstrations and "tribal" gatherings of groups like the Gay
Liberation Front. Hundreds of new "queer" writers began their careers
in the ten-year period 1969-79, a flowering made briefer by the demise
of many in the AIDS epidemic beginning in 1980.
"C'est admirable!" I told Marcel, anxious to depart before he began
to act out the films of Warhol. I then wandered off to the Parc
Luxembourg environment at EuroDisney to enjoy the animatronic birds.
1 Oscar Wilde, Picture of Dorian Gray
2 Jean Piaget, The Origins of Intelligence in the Child. Routledge
and Kegan Paul. London (1956) (paraphrased) and David Bohm (q.v.)
3 Piaget
4 Judy Grahn, She Who (excerpt) in The Work of A Common Woman
(Trumansburg, NY: Crossing Press) 1978.
5 Karin Ashley et. al for SDS, "You Don't Need a Weatherman to Know
Which Way the Wind Blows" New Left Notes, June 18, 1969
6 Weather Underground Organization, "New Morning-Changing Weather,"
(1970)
7 Velvet Underground, "I'm Set Free." The Velvet Underground
(1969)
8 Timothy Leary, Flashbacks: A personal and Cultural History of an
Era New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1990
9 Charles Fourier, Theory of Social Organization (New York: C. P.
Somerby, 1876).
10 Benedict de Spinoza, Ethics, R.H.M. Elwes, trans., (Amherst:
Prometheus Books) 1989.
11 David Bohm, The Essential David Bohm, edited by Lee Nichol (NY
& London:Routledge) 2003
12 Henry James, "The Private Life" in The Figure in the Carpet and
other stories (London: Penguin) 1986.
13 NYT, October 29, 2002, "A New View Of Our Universe: Only One of
Many"
By DENNIS OVERBYE (NYT)
14 Jean Baudrillard, The Mirror of Production,
Telos Press, St. Louis, 1975
15 HRH Felix Youssoupoff, Lost Splendor, NY:
Putnam, 1953.
16 Baudrillard
17 Karl Marx, Capital
18 (from "On the Concept of Labor," Telos 16
(Summer, 1973)
19 song taught to birds in Aldous Huxley's Island
20 Ronald Firbank, Vainglory
21 Ferd Eggan. Don't Block the Exits (NY:
Doofus Self-Publishing) 2005
22 Peggy Wood, quoted in Frank DeFord, Big Bill
Tilden: The Triumphs and the Tragedy (NY: Simon and Schuster)
1976.
23 Martin Heidegger "The Thing" a lecture from 1950 in Poetry, Launguage, Thought, (Harper &
Row, New York) 1975
24 Lenin, of course.
25 Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Rosa Luxemburg, Georg Kikacs, Antonio
Gramsci, C.L.R. James, Mario Tronti, Sergio Bologna, Mariarosa Dalla
Costa, Antonio Negri, Selma James, trad. melody, elaboration of a
12-bar blues, ababb rhyme scheme.
26 In "Letter to Comrades" of October 15 (28), 1917, Lenin quotes an
objection to immediate revolution: 'We have no majority among the
people, and without this condition the uprising is hopeless。'
Lenin retorts, "People who can say this are either distorters of the
truth or pedants who want an advance guarantee that throughout the
wole country the Bolshevik Party has received exactly one-half of the
votes plus one, this they want at all events, without taking the least
account of the real circumstances of the revolution. History has never
given such a guarantee, and it is quite unable to give it in any
revolution. To make such a demand is jeering at the audience, and is
nothing but a cover to hide one's own flight from reality。"
Quoted in Slavoj Zizek, ed., Revolution at the
Gates (London:Verso) 2002.
27 Ndabaningi Sithole Remanded In Prison (PANA.
17 February, 1996)
HARARE, Zimbabwe (PANA) - Trial of the leader of the Ndonga faction
of Zimbabwe African Union ZANU (NDONGA), Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole,
facing charges of plotting to assassinate President Robert Mugabe was
on Saturday adjourned to April 23. The opposition leader, who is on
100,000 zimdollars (11, 000 USD) bail, is facing two charges under the
Law and Order (Maintenance) Act for recruiting people to undergo
military training and conspiracy to engage in sabotage. He is accused
of personally picking the spot for the abortive attempt to kill
President Mugabe as he passed in his motorcade on August 4 last
year.
28 Peanut Butter Stew from Zimbabwe (Dovi) serves
4-6
2 medium onions, finely chopped 
2 green peppers, chopped
2 tablespoons butter
1 chicken, cut into pieces
2 cloves garlic, finely sliced and crushed
3 to 4 fresh tomatoes
6 to 8 fresh okra, seeded and chopped
1 teaspoon salt & 1⁄2 teaspoon pepper 
6 tablespoons smooth peanut butter
1 chili pepper or 1⁄2 teaspoon cayenne pepper 
1⁄2 pound spinach or pumpkin leaves
*In a large stew pot over medium heat, sauté onions in butter until
golden brown. Add garlic, salt and hot peppers.
*Stir for 2 or 3 minutes then add green peppers, okra and chicken.
Brown the chicken.
*When all the chicken pieces are brown on every side, mash tomatoes
with a fork and mix them into the stew, along with about 2 cups water. Reduce heat and simmer for 5 to 10
minutes.
*Thin the peanut butter with a few spoons of hot broth and add half
the resulting paste to the pot. Simmer until the meat is well-cooked.
*In a separate pot, boil spinach or pumpkin leaves for several
minutes until tender. Drain and toss with the remainder of the peanut
paste. Serve stew and greens side by side.
Recipe from The Africa News Cookbook, by the
Africa News Service, Inc., 1985, p. 44
29 Listen to Healing Tree: The Best of Stella
Chiweshe.
"Stella Rambisai Chiweshe Nekati is a woman warrior who defied the
traditional gender roles of her native Zimbabwe by learning to play
the mbira, a thumb piano whose ritual connection to the ancestral
spirits dates back to the 15th century. More than two decades of
international recording and concert performances have earned Chiweshe
the title "Queen of Mbira," a distinction which led to this "best of"
compilation, her first CD on a stateside label. Split between lulling
unplugged tracks (for dual mbiras, vocals, and percussion) and lively
worldbeat pieces (with that curious Afro-pop mix of upbeat rhythm,
buoyant melody, and trenchant lyrics), the disc proffers multi-leveled
music for enthusiasts of both contemporary and folkloric song forms.
Cyclical motifs combine earthy singing and translucent instrumental
syncopation to create a hypnotic sound of power and ancientness."
review by Sam Prestianni
30 Ndlovu is now a part-time AIDS educator, who joined Ethan Zohn,
the million-dollar winner of Survivor: Africa, in a prevention program
called Grassroots Soccer for boys in Harare. Never mind that Mugabe
thinks gay persons should be executed: in Africa, gay sex is somehow
irrelevant to AIDS.
31 IMF dumps Zim (Zimbabwe Independent, Dec 5,
2003) The International Monetary Fund (IMF) on Wednesday began
measures to expel Zimbabwe as a member of the fund, another blow for
beleaguered President Robert Mugabe already suspended from the
Commonwealth. The IMF's decision-making executive board said Zimbabwe
had "not actively cooperated" with the fund and had been in arrears on
loan repayments since February 2001.
Commonwealth on trial, by Dumisani Muleya (Zim,
Independent, Dec. 5, 2003)
ZIMBABWE will be directly in the firing line at the Commonwealth
Heads of Government Meeting (Chogm) which opens in Abuja, Nigeria,
today without President Robert Mugabe who has been barred from the
summit. With political temperatures rising dramatically over
Zimbabwe's suspension, the country's crisis is expected to dominate
Chogm and test to the limit the 54-member organisation's mettle in
dealing with issues of democracy and electoral conduct.
32 All quotations from David M. Halperin, Saint=Foucault: Towards a Gay Hagiography , Oxford University
Press: 1995All
33 Critical-Political Comments
"Regarding the Jefferson Airplane, it's important to remember the
atmosphere of the times. It's important to remember 1968. In 1968,
highway patrolmen opened fire on black students from South Carolina
State University who were marching to protest segregation at a bowling
alley. They killed 3, wounded 37. Riots began in Detroit and Newark.
Robert Kennedy was assassinated. An increasingly unpopular war was
raging which would eventually leave 54,000 American soldiers dead. Big
Brother (the government's version) was looking over people's
shoulders: a staffer on the National Security Council was responsible
for monitoring every anti-Vietnam war speech in the Congressional
Record. American officials were trying to put narcotic agents in the
Army, even though amphetamines were widely distributed as stimulants
to G.I.s. Martin Luther King, Jr. was not only wire-tapped, but
harassed by the FBI with cryptic warnings and unveiled threats. When
King was murdered, fires spread to within two blocks of the White
House. 65,000 troops saw riot duty across the United States. Columbia
University was taken over by students for six days - an action
repeated across the nation during the next year. In Chicago, the 1968
Democratic presidential convention was on its way to town, but
everyone was on strike - electrical workers, telephone installers, bus
and taxi drivers. The convention itself would be ringed with
electrified barbed wire; the security force had at its disposal
flame-throwers and bazookas. Even though (because?) one in six
demonstrators in Chicago may have been undercover cops, the police
brutality that resulted was so extreme it changed people's political
emphasis overnight. In California, Ronald Reagan would soon be warning
of bloodbaths. More riots, the Weathermen bombings, the murder of
students at Jackson State, the Chicago Seven conspiracy trial and much
more were still to come. There was momentousness, paranoia, and danger
on the national scene. Across America rednecks and warmongers were
punching out people who grew their hair long. A feeling of shared
oppression was widespread."
A SF Chronicle of Music
34 Karin Ashley, Bill Ayers, Barnardine Dohrn, John Jacobs, Jeff
Jones, Gerry Long, Howie Machtinger, Jim Mellen, Terry Robbins, Mark
Rudd and Steve Tappis, "You Don't Need a Weatherman to Know Which Way
the Wind Blows" New Left Notes, June 18,
1969
35 National Geographic, 1961.
Edom: (red) the name Edom was given to Esau, the first-born son of
Isaac and twin brother of Jacob, when he sold his birthright to the
latter for a meal of lentil pottage. The country which the Lord
subsequently gave to Esau was hence called the country of Edom and his
descendants were called Edomites.
Esau's bitter hatred to his brother Jacob for fraudulently obtaining
his blessing appears to have been inherited by his latest posterity.
The Edomites peremptorily refused to permit the Israelites to pass
through their land. For a period of 400 years we hear no more of the
Edomites. They were then attacked and defeated by Saul and some forty
years later by David. In the reign of Jehoshaphat (BC 914) the
Edomites attempted to invade Israel but failed. They joined
Nebuchadnezzar when that king besieged Jerusalem. For their cruelty at
this time they were fearfully denounced by the later prophets. After
this they settled in southern Palestine and for more than four
centuries continued to prosper. But during the warlike rule of the
Maccabees they were again completely subdued and even forced to
conform to Jewish laws and rites and submit to the government of
Jewish prefects. The Edomites were now incorporated with the Jewish
nation. They were idolaters. Their habits were singular. The Horites,
their predecessors in Mount Seir, were as their name implies
troglodytes or dwellers in caves; and the Edomites seem to have
adopted their dwellings as well as their country. Everywhere we meet
with caves and grottos hewn in the soft sandstone stra. .
Hypertext Webster Gateway (Easton's 1897 Bible
Dictionary)
36 Some Mathematical Founders:
Yi Xing (683-727)
Alcuin of York (c. 735-804)
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-Fazari (fl. c. 771)
Leo the Mathematician (c. 790-post 869)
Govindaswami (c. 800-850)
Mahavira (Mahaviracharya) (c. 850)
Abu `Abd Allah Mohammad ibn Jabir al-Battani (Albatenius) (c. 858)
Abu Nasr Muhammad ibn Muhammad Tarkhan ibn Awzalagh al-Farabi
(Alpharabius) (c. 870-c. 950
Dictionary of Scientific Biography. 15 volumes.
Edited by Charles Coulston Gillispie. Scribner, New York, 1970-1978,
with later additions.
37 Rumors that Maslow was sodomized by her father have never been
proved.
38 "Jam, n. archaic gay term for heterosexual: jam vs. fruit" The Queen's Lexicon,
39 Female genital mutilation (FGM) is the term used to refer to the
removal of part, or all, of the female genitalia. The most severe form
is infibulation, also known as pharaonic circumcision. An estimated
15% of all mutilations in Africa are infibulations. The procedure
consists of clitoridectomy (where all, or part of, the clitoris is
removed), excision (removal of all, or part of, the labia minora), and
cutting of the labia majora to create raw surfaces, which are then
stitched or held together in order to form a cover over the vagina
when they heal. A small hole is left to allow urine and menstrual
blood to escape. In some less conventional forms of infibulation, less
tissue is removed and a larger opening is left.
Girls undergoing the procedure have varying degrees of knowledge
about what will happen to them. Sometimes the event is associated with
festivities and gifts. Girls are exhorted to be brave. Where the
mutilation is part of an initiation rite, the festivities may be major
events for the community. Usually only women are allowed to be
present.
Sometimes a trained midwife will be available to give a local
anaesthetic. In some cultures, girls will be told to sit beforehand in
cold water, to numb the area and reduce the likelihood of bleeding.
More commonly, however, no steps are taken to reduce the pain. The
girl is immobilized, held, usually by older women, with her legs open.
When infibulation takes place, stitches may be used to hold the two
sides of the labia majora together, and the legs may be bound together
for up to 40 days. Antiseptic powder may be applied, or, more usually,
pastes - containing herbs, milk, eggs, ashes or dung - which are
believed to facilitate healing. The girl may be taken to a specially
designated place to recover where, if the mutilation has been carried
out as part of an initiation ceremony, traditional teaching is
imparted. Amnesty International, 1998
40 Heraclitus, 5th C BCE, became a misanthrope, leaving the city,
living in the mountains off herbs and plants; all citations from
Jonathan Barnes, ed. & trans., Early Greek
Philosophy, 2nd revised ed. London: Penguin, 2001.
41 David Bohm. The Qualitative Nature of
Infinity (1971)
42 The AKC would not recognize these as purebred offspring of Merle,
as they would affect the stability of Maltese as a breed. Merle
himself, transmigratory soul unbound by genetics, has personally
appeared at Westminster.
It is also worth noting here, by the way, that the rumors of an
incestuous and bestial relationship between Peabody and Sherman (who
are, after all, nephews or cousins, and not direct-line relations) are
not supported by any available evidence. Readers will be aware of
Peabody's seminal role in the promulgation of the postmodern theory of
history, wherein the past and present cultures of all times and places
are ransacked for information and entertainment. Merle has made no
published comment on these views; his is a more Schopenhauer-like
compassionate pessimism regarding human affairs .
43 John Clare (1793 - 1864) "The Fallen Elm"
44 To Kevatta. Translated from the Pali by
Thanissaro Bhikkhu.
Sutta (Teaching, in Pali) is the same as the Sanskrit word Sutra;
this and many other Suttas are part of the Pali Canon, sayings
attributed to Gautama Buddha, written in gold on palm leaves around
the 4th C BCE and kept in Sri Lanka-- what some view as the oldest
preserved books, and all agree are some of the most beautiful books in
the world.
45 Foucault, Michel, Discipline and Punish: The
Birth of the Prison, New York, 1995, Vintage Books, Random
House.
46 "Mr. Lee committed suicide to save the farmers," said An Sung
Hyun, 65, a neighbor. "He sacrificed himself for farmers like me."
That sentiment is echoed in a new banner that greets drivers as they
enter Jangsu. "The late Lee Kyung Hae, patriot and hero, we will
follow your goal," it reads. "We strongly oppose W.T.O.
globalization." To protect farmers, South Korea has tariffs of over
100 percent on 142 farm products - consumers here pay about four times
American prices for rice - helping support six million farmers in a
nation of 47 million people.
But South Korea's real money is made selling cars, ships and
cellphones around the world. To keep markets open for its economy, the
world's 12th largest, South Korea has recently made concessions on
food imports, in bilateral talks and in preliminary negotiations in
the W.T.O. With each concession, life gets a little harder for the
farmers.
"It is not hard to guess why he chose to terminate his life," said La
Jung Han, an official in Seoul at the the Korean Advanced Farmers
Federation, a group Mr. Lee headed for many years. "Probably, the main
motivation was despair." It was "a despair deeply imbedded in the
conditions of the farmers, the agriculture industry and the rural
communities."
From his wife's grave, Mr. Lee's view would have included his modest
one-story brick house and his experimental 40-acre farm. In the 1970's
it was an effort by a college graduate from Seoul, much commented
upon, to demonstrate how farmers could survive and compete despite
declining prices for their products.
"Even now the land is being abandoned," An Sung Hyun, said, pointing
out paddies abandoned across the valley floor. "If we import more
food, more land will be abandoned."
"Parents who are farming, don't want their children to do farming,"
he said, speaking in a room filled with farmers. "There is no hope.
They cannot get any benefits from farming."
"Frankly speaking, I am really, really proud of him," his daughter
Goh Wun said. "Because he sacrificed himself not for himself, but for
the nation." NY Times, Sept. 16, 2003.
47 "And the practice of calling on psychiatric espertise, which is
widespread…means that the sentence, even if it is always formulated in
terms of legal punishment, implies, more or less obscurely, judgments
of normality, attributions of causality, assessments of possible
changes, anticipations as to the offender's future." Foucault,
ibid.
48 A.G.S. Kariyawasam. Buddhist Ceremonies and
Rituals of Sri Lanka The Wheel Publication 1995
49 Ibid
50 Patrick Moore, Beyond Shame: Reclaiming the
Abandoned History of Radical Gay Sexuality (Boston: Beacon
Press, 2004)
51 Ranier Marie Rilke, Duino Elegies
52 Dubai
March 4, 2004
By GARY MILHOLLIN and KELLY MOTZ
WASHINGTON
America's relations with Pakistan and several other Asian countries
have been rocked by the discovery of the vast smuggling network run by
the Pakistani nuclear scientist Abdul Qadeer Khan. Unfortunately, one
American ally at the heart of the scandal, Dubai in the United Arab
Emirates, seems to be escaping punishment despite its role as the key
transfer point in Dr. Khan's atomic bazaar.
Why ship through Dubai? Because it may be the easiest place in the
world to mask the real destination of cargo. Consider how the
Malaysian government is making the case for the innocence of its
manufacturing company. "No document was traced that proved" the
company "delivered or exported the said components to Libya,"
according to the country's inspector general of police. The real
destination, he said, "was outside the knowledge" of the producer. One
can be certain that if the Khan ring's European suppliers are ever
tracked down, they will offer a similar explanation.
Dubai provides companies and governments a vital asset: automatic
deniability. Its customs agency even brags that its policy on
re-exporting "enables traders to transit their shipments through Dubai
without any hassles." Next to Dubai's main port is the Jebel Ali free
trade zone, a haven for freewheeling international companies. Our
organization has documented 264 firms from Iran and 44 from rogue
regimes like Syria and North Korea.
53 Poem found written on the bathroom wall in a rest stop near
Bonn.
54 from Histoire de Langued'oc, prepared by a Languedoc separatist
earthworks collective,, Les Cathares-Fourieristes DSLReclam
55 John Wasmod of Homburg's Tractatus contra hereticos, beckardos,
lulhardos, et swestriones, 1396, quoted in Robert S. Lerner, The
Heresy of the Free Spirit in the Later Middle Ages, U of Notre Dame
Press, 1972.
56 [Verbal description] sins against nature in attempting to tell the
ear what ought to be told to the ey。[Poetry proceeds] by
mentioning the individual componehtsw of beauty, and these are
separated from one another by time, so that time itself interposes a
forgetting between them.The poet is unable to construct that
harmonic total effect which is formed。 through conjoint presence.one part procees out of t he other successively; the succeeding one
does not arise without its predecessor dying.
Quotations from L Da Vinci's Tratatto, taken
from Leo Steinberg's Leonardo's Incessant Last
Supper, 2001, NY: ZONE Books, p27 & n14.
57 Historia de Sancta Maria Magdalena, Iacobus de Voragine (A.D.
1230-1298)
. .] Cum autem quadam die Maria Magdalena praedicaret, praedictus
princeps dixit ei: "Putas posse defendere fidem, quam praedicas!" Cui
illa: "Equidem illam defendere praesto sum, utpote quotidianis
miraculis et praedicatione magistri mei Petri, qui Romae praesidet,
roboratam." Cui princeps cum coniuge dixit: "Ecce dictis tuis per
omnia obtemperare parati sumus, si a Deo, quem praedicas, nobis filium
impetrabis. - "Propter hoc"' inquit Magdalena, "non remanebit."
Tunc beata Maria pro ipsis Dominum exoravit, ut sibi filium concedere
dignaretur. Cuius preces Dominus exaudivit et matrona illa concepit.
Tunc vir eius coepit velle proficisci ad Petrum, ut probaret, si, ut
Magdalena de Christo praedicaverat, sic veritas se haberet. Cui uxor
dixit: "Quid est, domine! Putasne sine me proficisci! Absit. Te enim
recedente recedam; te veniente veniam; te quiescente quiescam." Cui
vir ait:'Non sic fiet, domina, etenim cum sis gravida et in mari sint
infinita pericula, de facili periclitari posses. Domi igitur quiesces
et possessionibus nostris curam impendes."
Et contra illa instabat femineum nec mutans femina morem et cum
lacrimis pedibus eius obvoluta, quod petebat, tandem obtinuit. Maria
ergo humeris eorum signum crucis imposuit, ne eos antiquus hostis in
aliquo itinere impediret. Navem igitur omnibus necessaris copiose
onerantes, ceteia, quae habebant, in Mariae Magdalenae custodia
relinquentes proficisci coeperunr. Iamque unius diei et noctis cursu
consummato coepit nimium mare intumescere, ventus flare, ita ut omnes
et maxime matrona gravida et debilis tam saeva inundatione fluctuum
quassati gravissimis angustiis urgerentur, in tantum, quod in eam
subito dolor partus irruit et inter angustias ventris et pressuras
temporis filium parturiens exspiravit. Natus igitur puerulus
palpitabat et mamillarum maternarum quaerens solacia lamentabiles
dabat vagitus. Proh dolor! Et natus est infans vivus et matricida
effectus. Mori eum convenit, cum non sit, qui vitae tribuat alimentum.
Quid faciet peregrinus, et cum uxorem mortuam videat et puerum
vagientem querulis vocibus matris mammam appetentem! Lamentabatur
plurimum et dicebat: "Heu miser, quid facies! Filium habere
desiderasti, et matrem cum filio perdidisti." Nautae acclamabant
dicentes: "Proiciatur in mare hoc corpus, antequam insimul pereamus.
Quamdiu enim nobiscum fuerit, haec quassatio non cessabit." Et cum
corpus appredendissent, ut illud in mare iactarent: "Parcite" inquit
peregrinus, "parcite, et si nec mihi nec matri parcere volueritis,
misereamini saltem parvuli vagientis. Sinite modicum et sustinete, si
forte mulier prae dolore in exstasi posita adhuc valeat respirare." Et
ecce non procul a navi quidam collis apparuit. Quo viso utilius esse
credidit corpus et puerulum illuc deferri, quam marinis beluis ad
devorandum dari et vix a nautis prece et pretio extorsit, ut illic
applicarent. Cumque illic prae duritia foveam non potuisset effodere,
in secretiori parte collis, chlamyde supposita, corpus collocavit et
puerulum mammis eius apponens cum lacrimis ait: "O Maria Magdalena, ad
perditionis meae cumulum Massiliae applicuisti: Cur infelix
admonitione tua hoc iter arripui! Petiistine Deum, ut mulier mea hac
de causa conciperet et periret! Ecce enim concepit et pariendo mortem
subiit. Conceptus est natus, ut pereat, cum non sit, qui enutriat.
Ecce, quod prece tua obtinui, tibi enim omnia mea commendavi Deoque
tuo commendo. Si potens es, memor sis animae matris, et prece tua
misereatur, ne pereat natus." Tunc chlamyde sua corpus cum puero
circumquaque operuit et postmodum navem conscendit. Cumque ad Petrum
venisset, Petrus ei obvius fuit, qui viso signo crucis in umero suo,
qui esset et unde veniret, sciscitatus est. Qui omnia sibi per ordinem
narravit, cui Petrus: "Pax tibi fiat, bene venisti et utili consiiio
credidisti. Nec moleste feras, si mulier tua dormit, si parvulus cum
ea quiescit. Potens enim est Dominus, cui vult, dona dare, data
auferre, ablata restituere, et maerorem tuum in gaudium commutare."
Petrus autem ipsum in Hierosolymam duxit et omnia loca, in quibus
Christus praedicavit et miracula fecit, locum etiam, in quo passus est
et in quo caelos adscendit, eidem ostendit. Cumque de fide fuisset
instructus diligenter a Petro, biennii spatio iam elapso navem
adscendit repatriare curans. Cum igitur navigarent, Domino disponente
iuxta collem, in quo corpus uxoris cum puero positum fuerat,
pervenerunt. Qui prece et pretio eos ibi ad applicandum induxit.
Puerulus autem ibidem a Maria Magdalena incolumis conservatus
frequenter ad litus maris procedebat et ibidem, ut puerorum moris est,
cum lapillis et glareis ludere solitus erat. Et, cum applicuisset,
vidit puerulum more solito in litore maris cum lapillis ludentem, et
quid esset, admirari non desinens, de scapha exsiliit. Quem videns
parvulus, cum numquam tale quid vidisset, expavit et ad solita matris
recurrens ubera occulte sub chlamyde latitabat. Peregrinus vero, ut
manifestius videret, illuc accessit et puerulum pulcherrimum matris
ubera sugentem invenit et accipiens puerum ait: "0 beata Maria
Magdalena, quam felix essem, quam mihi cuncta prospera advenissent, si
mulier respiraret et mecum repatriare valeret. Scio equidem, scio et
procul dubio credo, quod tu, quae puerum dedisti et in hac rupe per
biennium pavisti, poteris matrem suam prece tua pristinae restituere
sanitati."
Ad haec verba mulier respiravit et quasi a somno evigilans ait:
"Magni meriti es, beata Maria Magdalena, et gloriosa, quae in partus
mei pressuris obstetricis implevisti officium et in omnibus
necessitatibus ancillae servitium explesti." Quo audito peregrinus
admirans ait: "Vivisne uxor mea dilecta?" Cui illa: "Vivo equidem et
nunc primo de peregrinatione, de qua et tu venisti, venio. Et sicut
beatus Petrus te Hierosolymam duxit et omnia loca, in quibus Christus
passus est, mortuus et sepultus, et alia plura loca ostendit, sic et
ego una cum beata Maria Magdalena duce et comite vobiscum fui et
conspecta memoriae commendavi." Et incipiens loca omnia, in quibus
Christus passus est, et miracula, quae viderat, adeo plene explicuit,
ut nec in aliquo deviaret.
Tunc peregrinus recepta coniuge et puero navem laetus conscendit et
paulo post Massiliae portibus applicuerunt et ingressi invenerunt
beatam Mariam Magdalenam cum suis discipulis praedicantem. Et eius
pedibus cum lacrimis provoluti omnia, quae iis acciderant, narraverunt
et a beato Maximino sacrum baptisma susceperunt. Tunc in civitate
Massiliae omnium idolorum templa destruentes Christi ecclesias
construxerunt et beatum Lazarum in eiusdem civitatis episcopum
unanimiter elegerunt. Tandem divino nutu ad Aquensem civitatem
venerunt et populum illum ad fidem Christi per multa miracula
adduxerunt. . .]
58 John Wasmod of Homburg's Tractatus contra hereticos, beckardos,
lulhardos, et swestriones, 1396, quoted in Robert S. Lerner, The
Heresy of the Free Spirit in the Later Middle Ages, U of Notre Dame
Press, 1972.
59 >>Torture
>>The United States Underground
>>by Silvia Baraldini
>>
>>(Silvia remains under house arrest in Italy under
terms of her
>>repatriation as a US political prisoner)
>>http://www.prisonactivist.org/pps+pows/silvia.html
>>
>>from Il Manifesto, May 11, 2004, p. 10 (translated)
>>
>>
>>
>>Faced with the catastrophic reality of the tortures
inflicted on
>>Iraqi citizens by U.S. and British occupation forces,
the defense of
>>the two governments has been centered on the
identification of the
>>"bad apples" responsible for what could otherwise be
characterized
>>as exceptional episodes -- episodes extraneous to the
democratic
>>systems of the two countries. Since The New Yorker
published the
>>first images, we have been inundated by interviews
with inhabitants
>>of the rural towns from which the soldiers accused of
the torture
>>originate. Full of condmenation and dismay, these
interviews
>>attempt to reassure us of the deep democratic
sentiment that
>>animates Americans.
>>
>>Curiously, not a single interview has appeared with
that part of the
>>U.S. population that would be able to testify to the
torture, abuses
>>of power, sexual violence and conditioning that it
has personally
>>suffered. I am speaking of the prisoners, both
political and
>>social, who have served their sentences in the
special sections of
>>Marion, Illinois; Florence, Colorado; Pelican Bay,
California;
>>Lexington, Kentucky; and Alderson, West Virginia; to
name some of
>>the most miserable known. If a journalist had tracked
down Rafael
>>Cancel Miranda, he would be able to testify that in
the
>>not-so-distant years of the 1970s, in the
undergrounds of Marion,
>>prisoners were handcuffed to walls and left for
hours. Frank "Big
>>Black" Smith would be able to recount how all of the
prisoners of
>>Attica, at the end of their rebellion, were stripped
nude and forced
>>to submit while members of the National Guard beat
them with clubs
>>and rifles, and how he, himself, an ex-football
player, was forced
>>to remain on his feet for interminable hours with a
football held
>>beneath his chin, surrounded by soldiers ready to
beat him if he
>>dropped it. Samuel Brown would be able to tell us
about his severe
>>neck injury that was purposely left untreated as a
strategy for
>>softening him before he was interrogated by the FBI.
And Sekou
>>Odinga could tell us how, after he was arrested, his
chest was used
>>as an ashtray by members of the task force that
interrogated him.
>>Alejandrina Torres would be able to tell us about
himself -- a
>>Puerto Rican political prisoner later pardoned by
President Clinton,
>>who was violated in federal prison in Phoenix,
Arizona, not with a
>>broomstick but with the gloved fists of a so-called
nurse. Or Susan
>>Rosenberg, who spent two months in the winter of 1988
without sleep
>>in a cell of the special unit of Lexington Prison
where the lights
>>were turned on every twenty minutes, where the
curtainless shower is
>>observed by one of the 21 surveillance cameras of
that unit, who
>>experienced the humiliation of having to ask a male
prison guard for
>>a tampon every time she needed one. The women
prisoners in Georgia
>>state prison and in Dublin federal prison would be
able to testify
>>how in prison one can be sexually abused by the same
individuals who
>>are supposed to protect you. In Pelican Bay and
Florence,
>>journalists would find the prisons upon which
Guantanamo was
>>modelled.
>>
>>
>>The reality that is inexorably emerging from Iraqi
prisons should
>>not surprise us. For years, Amnesty International,
Human Rights
>>Watch, and the American Civil Liberties Union have
all denounced the
>>analagous conditions that exist in special prisons in
the United
>>States.
>>
60 Richard Bruce Nugent, Gay Rebel of the Harlem
Renaissance. Thomas H. Wirth, ed. Duke U Press, 2002.
61 Ven. Khenchen Thrangu, Rinpoche, transcribed by Gaby Hollman,
translated from Tibetan by Ken Holmes, Namo Buddha Seminar, Glasgow,
Scotland, 1993.
62 Bohr, Heisenberg and Mermin citations from Nick Herbert, Quantum Reality Beyond the New Physics: An Excursion
into Metaphysics and the Meaning of Reality, NY: Anchor Press,
1987.
63 Freidrich A. Hayek, Law, Legislation and
Liberty, vol. 1, London: Routledge, 1982.
64 All quotations from S. Rheinfahrt, My Struggles
Against Fascism and Eurocommunism, as told to Joseph Jamal,.
Abner Cransky, trans. Berlin: Falsus Verlag, 1994.
65 Henry Wadsworth Longfellow took this name for Lake Superior from
Henry Schoolcraft, amateur ethnologist and fabulator of Menominee and
Chippewa tales.
66 . 1. A subcortical group of nuclei in the forebrain which serves a.
the limbic system, b. the autonomic nervous
system (see FIGHT-OR-FLIGHT), and c. the
endocrine system. 2. A thumbnail-sized neuro
structure which organizes basic nonverbal responses, such as aggression, 
anger
, sexuality, and 
fear
.
Evolution I. The hypothalamus has deep
evolutionary roots in the chemical sense of smell
Evolution II. As the forebrain's main
chemical-control area, the hypothalamus regulates piscine adrenal medullae, chemical-releasing glands
which, in living fish, consist of two lines of cells near the kidneys.
The adrenal medullae pump adrenaline into the
bloodstream, from where it effects every cell in the fish's body. (
N.B.
: In humans, adrenaline speeds up body
movements, strengthens muscle contractions, and
energizes the activity of spinal-cord paleocircuits.)
RESEARCH REPORTS: 1.
Pathways involved in oral and genital functions "converge in that part
of the hypothalamus in which electrical stimulation results in angry and defensive
behaviour" (MacLean 1973:44). 2. In higher
vertebrates, the olfactory system and the hypophysis [i.e., the
pituitary gland (which is linked to the hypothalamus)] "are derived
from a single patch of embryonic [neuro]ectoderm" (Stoddart 1990:13
Copyright © 1998 - 2001 (David B. Givens/Center for Nonverbal Studies)
67 H. W. Longfellow, The Song of Hiawatha
68 Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Idomeneo, re di Creta. 1781. libretto by
Giambattista Varesco, Los Angeles Opera, September 9, 2004. Placido
Domingo, Idomeneo. Adriana Damato, Ilia. Kent Nagano, Conductor.
(orig. Flanders Opera, Belgium, dir. By David McVicar)
69 Version 2, 9/11/04 (former version titled No Matter Who Wins,
9/06/04)
70 Memo to other leftists like me: read Multitude. It's irritating in its generalities and sometimes too
affectless, but it helps. It helped me realize that I can't rely on
old concepts like US imperialism to understand what's going on. The
blame for attacks on US targets is not just on the US. The changes in
the global world order are not just a super-imperialism of one
super-power, but a global contestation for power between the
trans-national empire of capital and what Negri and Hardt call the
multitude. It makes sense out of things that can otherwise be
addressed only through righteous but ignorant indignation.
71 This country, like Rome under the lesser
Caesars, may send out soldiers for 400 years or so, but it will
decline into a third-rate power. In its decline it will look like
the England of the 20st Century, holding on to
coalitions of the willing, fighting border wars continually,
striking out with money and technology at competitors and friends,
bewildered that others don't like us, and disappointed at our
seeming failure to keep hope alive. Our overweening pride, inflated
by the dollars everyone in the world clamored for, has made our
vision too dim to notice that we, also like Imperial Romans or
Brits, are no longer the vital, ingenious frontierspeople we liked
to imagine ourselves.
72 "Liebst du um Schönheit," Clara Weick Schumann (1891-1896)
setting of If you love for beauty, by Friedrich Rückert (1788-1866) 
73 -Robert Schumann came to live and study with Clara Wieck's father
in 1830, and asked permission to marry Clara in 1837; Wieck objected,
and did all he could to prevent the wedding before Clara's 21st
birthday when she would be legally able without his consent; Robert
and Clara filed a lawsuit, and won, but out of spite went ahead and
married the day before her birthday, September 12, 1840. 
-They first lived in Leipzig where they both taught in the
Conservatory there; they moved to Dresden in 1844, to Düsseldorf in
1850. 
-Their children were: Marie (1841-1929), Elise (1843-1928), Julie
(1845-72), Emil (1846-47), Ludwig (1848-99), Ferdinand (1849-91),
Eugenie (1851-1938), Felix (1854-79). 
-Johannes Brahms (1833-1897) met the Schumanns in 1853, and remained
a dear friend of both while they lived. -Robert's mental health was
poor, and following a suicide attempt in 1854, he was committed to the
asylum at Endenich; he is said to have suffered from manic depression
and psychosis. 
743 Reference to scientific articles on
examination of the hypothalamus, conducted by Simon LeVay, Ph.D. , who
claims this organ is markedly smaller in gay males and females than in
heterosexual males.
LeVay supports the thesis expressed in The Man Who
Would Be Queen, that there are no "true" transgenders. The
author, J. Michael Bailey, a faculty member at Northwestern University
in Chicago, bases his assertion on Prof. Ray Blanchard's theory of
autogynephilia, a term described as love of oneself as a woman. It
suggests that there are only two types of male-to-female transsexuals:
homosexual transsexuals and autogynephiles.
[The views of Blanchard, Bailey and LeVay have been taken up by the
Christian fundamentalist right to further their eradication of
transgender persons and of homosexual behaviors. Ed.]
75 Jean-Leon Gerôme (1824-1904) oil on canvas, Sterling and Francine
Clark Art Institute, Williamstown, MA, USA.
76 Lacie & Zarkov's Comparison of MDA to MDMA:
"The differences from MDM(A) are striking: MDA is more hallucinogenic
with noticeable closed eye imagery, is a much greater aesthetic
enhancer, especially of people and of music; is more euphoric; more
"drug-like", a heavier and more obviously body-involved trip. Tactile
sensation is more powerful, erotic and noticeable on MDA. Physical
effects are more up-front: gastric upset, pupil dilation, water
retention, limbic arousal. On the whole, we find MDA a more enjoyable
and interesting trip; longer lasting and more sexual/sensual. Our
favorite characteristic is that one retains an interesting psychedelic
ideation on MDA, rather then the feeling-oriented, but rather idealess
thinking of MDM(A). <http://www.erowid.org>
77 Alan Hovhaness (rec. 4/28/1958), Fritz Reiner, Chicago Symphony
Orchestra, RCA Victor.
78 Olivier Messsiaen (rec. 1969?), Olivier Messiaen, organ, aux
grandes orgues Cavaillé-Coll de l'eglise de la Sainte Trinité à Paris,
Erato Recordings.
79 György Ligeti (rec. April 7-9, 2001) for 12 female voices and
orchestra, Asko/Schönberg Ensemble, Reinbert de Leeup, conductor,
Teldec Classics.
80 Luciano Berio (rec. 10/79), Kölner Runfunkchor, Kölner Rundfunk
Sinfonie Orchester, Luciano Berio, conductor, DGG.
81 Morten Lauridsen (rec. 1998), Los Angeles Master Chorale,
Salamunovich, Director), Rubeda Canis Musica.
82 Mud and Water: The Collected Teachings of Zen
Master Bassui, translated by Arthur Bravermann. (2000, Wisdom
Publications).
83 Robert and Clara's children were: Marie (1841-1929), Elise
(1843-1928), Julie (1845-72), Emil (1846-47), Ludwig (1848-99),
Ferdinand (1849-91), Eugenie (1851-1938), Felix (1854-79).
-Johannes Brahms (1833-1897) met the Schumanns in 1853, and remained
a dear friend of both while they lived.
-Robert's mental health was poor, and following a suicide attempt in
1854, he was committed to the asylum at Endenich; he is said to have
suffered from manic depression and psychosis. 
-After Robert's death, Clara moved to Berlin in 1857, where she
performed, taught, and edited Robert's works and letters; she was
known as a champion and interpreter of the music of Schumann and
Brahms, and was a direct influence on their music.  Her last home was
in Frankfurt.
-Brahms never married. Brahms' love for Clara was made somewhat
public when he dedicated several songs to her. Clara Schumann died in
1889. Brahms attended her graveside funeral. It was a cold and damp
day and Brahms caught a "chill." He died just a few months later. Was
it from the chill? Or was it from a lonely heart?
You decide.
 
84 Benno Sarel, La class ouvriere d'Allemagne orientale (1945-1958)
(Paris:Editionsw ouvrieres, 1958. quoted in Michael Hardt and Antonio
Negri, Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire New York:
Penguin Press, 2004.
85 Jomo Kenyatta was born at Ng'enda in the Gatundu Division of
Kiambu in the year 1889. As a boy, Kenyatta assisted his grandfather,
who was a medicine man. Kenyatta took interest in Agikuyu culture and
customs. He received his preliminary education at the Scottish Mission
Center at Thogoto. He also received elementary technical education
there.
He was later baptized a Christian with the name of John Peter, which
he changed to Johnstone. He changed his name to Jomo in 1938. He lived
among Masai relatives in Narok during World War I. Here he worked as a
clerk to an Asian trader. After the war, he served as a storekeeper to
a European firm. At this time, he began wearing his beaded belt
Kinyatta.
In 1928, he published his newspaper, Muigwithania that dealt with
Kikuyu culture and new farming methods. KCA sent him to England in
1929 to influence British opinion on tribal land. After touring some
parts of Europe, including Russia in 1930, he returned to Kenya to
fight the case on female circumcision with the Scottish Mission. He
supported the independent schools.
In 1931, he again went to England to present a written petition to
parliament. He met Mahatma Gandhi of India in November 1932. After
giving evidence before the Morris Carter Commission, he proceeded to
Moscow to learn Economics but was forced to return to Britain by 1933.
During the gold rush, land in Kakamega reserve was being distributed
to settlers. This made Kenyatta angry and spoke about Britain's
injustice. For which reason he was dubbed a communist by the British.
He taught Gikuyu at the University College, London and also wrote a
book on the Kikuyu language in 1937. Under Professor Malinowski, he
studied Anthropology at the famous London School of Economics (LSE).
In 1938, his book, Facing Mount Kenya saw the
light of day. It was about Kikuyu customs.
During the World War II , Kenyatta served on a farm in the United
Kingdom, while owning his own farm there. He married Edna Clarke,
mother of his son, Peter Magana in 1942. Along with other African
leaders, including Nkrumah of Ghana, he took part in the 5th
Pan-African Congress of 1945 in Manchester.
On October 20, 1952, Sir Evelyn, Baring, newly appointed Governor of
Kenya of two weeks, declared a state of emergency in the country. Jomo
Kenyatta and other prominent leaders were arrested. His trial at
Kapenguria on April 8, 1953, for managing Mau Mau, was a mockery of
justice. (Contemporary opinion linked him with the Mau Mau but later
research claims otherwise. From Wikipedia.org 8 Aug, 2004. ) He was
sentenced to 7 years in imprison (sic) with hard labor and to
indefinite restrictions thereafter. On August 21, 1961, nine years
after his arrest, he was freed from all restrictions.
On June 1, 1963, Mzee Kenyatta became the first Prime
Minister of self-governing Kenya. At midnight on December 12, 1963, at
Uhuru Stadium, amid world leaders and multitudes of people, the Kenya
flag was unfurled. A new nation was born. A year later on December 12,
1964, Kenya became a Republic within the Commonwealth, with Kenyatta,
as the President.
Mzee Kenyatta is acclaimed from all quarters of the world as a true
son of Africa, a renowned leader of vision, initiative, guidance and
an international public figure of the highest caliber. Kenya under the
"Baba Wa Taifa" (Father of the Nation) had enjoyed political
stability, economic progress as well as agricultural, industrial and
educational advances. From 1974 onwards, Mzee declared free primary
education up to primary grade 4.
At this stage he asked white settlers not to leave Kenya and
supported reconciliation. He retained the role of prime minister after
independence was declared on December 12, 1963. In 1964 he became
president of the country.
Kenyatta's policy was conciliatory and he kept many colonial civil
servants in their old jobs. He had to ask for British troops' help
against Somali revolts in the northeast and an army mutiny in Nairobi
(January 1964). Some British troops remained in the country. On
November 10, 1964, KADU's representatives joined the ranks of KANU,
forming a single party.
Kenyatta instituted relatively peaceful land reform, oversaw Kenya's
joining the United Nations, and concluded trade agreements with Milton
Obote's Ugandaand Julius Nyerere's Tanzania. He pursued a non-aligned
foreign policy. Stability attracted foreign investment and he was an
influential figure everywhere in Africa. However, his authoritarian
policies drew criticism and caused dissent. (wikipedia.org)
Jomo Kenyatta died on 22nd August 1978 at 3.30 A.M. in Mombasa at the
age of 89 years. He was succeeded by Daniel Arap Moi.
86 "
Facing Mount Kenya is a central
document of the highest distinction in anthropological literature, an
invaluable key to the structure of African society and the nature of
the African mind Facing Mount Kenya is not only
a formal study of life and death, work and play, sex and the family in
one of the greatest tribes of contemporary Africa, but a work of
considerable literary merit. The very sight and sound of Kikuyu tribal
life presented here are at once comprehensive and intimate, and as
precise as they are compassionate.
Jomo Kenyatta, the grandson of a Kikuyu medicine man, was among the
foremost leaders of African nationalism and one of the great men at
the modern world. In the 1930's he studied at the London School of
Economics and took his degree in anthropology under Bronislaw
Malinowski, one result of which is this now famous account of his own
Kikuyu tribe." Female Genital Cutting Education and
Networking Project
www.fgmnetwork.org
It is important to note that Malinowski was one of the inventors of
functionalist anthropology, a man, a european. His view of the actions
of non-european peoples was, by force of his status as a guest in the
places he studied, a laissez-faire one. It is reasonable to assume
that he taught Kenyatta and other students to "understand" the
function of clitoridectomy in Kikiyu culture but discouraged
censorious views of such practices (e.g. those of Scottish
missionaries in Kenya) on the grounds of non-intervention. Much debate
has ensued over the years regarding clitoridectomy and female genital
cutting. As in this excerpt from Kenyatta, the debate frequently pits
live African women against tradition and yet by "defending a culture"
leaves a relatively recent historical artifact in place without
critique.
87 Bruce Bagemihl , Biological Exuberance. Animal
Homosexuality and Natural Diversity.
St. Martin's Press, New York, 1999,
88 Blog by Cristina Cardoze at www.rockhawk.com
89 review by Susan McCarthy at salon.com
90 review by Gert Korthof, 21 Sep 2003   (updated 24 Apr 2004) at
www.wasdarwingwrong.com
91 OH-58D KIOWA WARRIOR RECONNAISSANCE/ATTACK
HELICOPTER, USA
The Armed OH-58D Kiowa Warrior, in service with the US Army, is
supplied by Bell Helicopter Textron of Fort Worth, Texas. Around 375
Kiowas are in service and the single engine, double-bladed armed
reconnaissance helicopter has been deployed in support of United
States armed forces around the world including Haiti, Somalia and the
Gulf of Arabia (Desert Storm and Desert Shield). In 2002, Kiowas were
deployed as part of NATO's SFOR forces in Bosnia and, in 2003, 120
Kiowas were deployed in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.
The primary mission of the helicopter is in the scout attack role.
The helicopter can be optionally equipped to carry out transport and
utility roles using equipment kits installed externally on existing
hard points. A cargo carrying hook is rated to carry loads up to
2,000lb. Emergency casualty evacuation can be carried out transporting
two casualties on litters (stretchers), plus over 320kg of supplies to
an operating radius of more than 185km. The Kiowa can be used for
insertion of up to six troops for critical point security missions.
WEAPONS
The OH-58D is equipped with two universal quick change weapons
pylons. Each pylon can be armed with two Hellfire missiles, seven
Hydra 70 rockets, two air-to-air Stinger missiles or one .50 calibre
fixed forward machine gun.
Mission processors control the suite of mission subsystems via a
Military Standard 1553B bus. An onboard computer provides laser
ranging and target location within 10m.
COUNTERMEASURES
The countermeasures suite includes an AN/ALQ-144 infrared jammer,
radar warning receivers against pulsed and continuous wave radars and
a laser warning detector.
FIRE CONTROL AND OBSERVATION
The distinctive Mast Mounted Sight (MMS) from Boeing, situated above
the rotor blades, enables the Kiowa Warrior to operate by day and
night and to engage the enemy at the maximum range of the weapon
systems and with the minimum exposure of the helicopter. The mast
mounted sight contains a suite of sensors which includes: a high
resolution television camera for long range target detection; a
thermal imaging sensor for navigation, target acquisition and
designation; a laser rangefinder/designator for target location and
guidance of the Hellfire missiles and designation for Copperhead
artillery rounds; and a boresight assembly which provides in-flight
sensor alignment. The laser rangefinder/designator is also employed
for handoff to an AH-1 Cobra helicopter for TOW missile engagements.
DRS Technologies is currently responsible for the contract for the
sensor suite.
NAVIGATION AND COMMUNICATIONS
The US Army OH-58D is equipped with an attitude heading reference
system (AHRS) from Litton and an integrated global positioning system
and inertial navigation system, GPS/INS. A data-loading module allows
the pre-mission storing of navigation waypoint data and radio
frequencies.
The mission equipment includes an Improved Data Modem for Digital
Battlefield Communications, (IDMDBC). The communications system is
based on the Have-Quick UHF and SINCGARS FM anti-jam radio.
ENGINE
The OH-58D Helicopter is equipped with a Model 250 485kW turbine
engine from Rolls-Royce. The transmission has a transient power level
of 475kW. The engine and transmission system have been upgraded to
provide high performance levels in high temperature and extreme
climates.
(information supplied by www.army-technology.com/projects/kiowa "the website for the
defense industry"
92 website: www.shephard.co.uk
93 The anachronistic use of the word revolutionary is permissible
here as these Brethren and Sistren of the Free Spirit are anarchists
avant la lettre.
94 see Chap 35
95 see Chap 25
96 cf. Chap 23
97 see Chap 36
98 see Chap 48
99 
100 directed by William Arntz, Betsy Chasse, Mark Vicente, 2004.
101 Heisenberg's discussions moved rather freely and quickly from
talk about experimental inaccuracies to epistemological or ontological
issues and back again. However, ontological questions seemed to be of
somewhat less interest to him. For example, there is a passage
(Heisenberg, 1927, p. 197), where he discusses the idea that, behind
our observational data, there might still exist a hidden reality in
which quantum systems have definite values for position and momentum,
unaffected by the uncertainty relations. He emphatically dismisses
this conception as an unfruitful and meaningless speculation, because,
as he says, the aim of physics is only to describe observable data.
Similarly in the Chicago Lectures (Heisenberg 1930, p. 11) he warns
against the fact that the human language permits the utterance of
statements which have no empirical content at all, but nevertheless
produce a picture in our imagination. He notes, "One should be
especially careful in using the words 'reality', 'actually', etc.,
since these words very often lead to statements of the type just
mentioned." So, Heisenberg also endorsed an interpretation of his
relations as rejecting a reality in which particles have simultaneous
definite values for position and momentum.
http://www.aip.org/history/heisenberg/p08c.htm
102 Bohr denied that classical concepts could be used to attribute
properties to a physical world in-itself behind the phenomena, i.e.
properties different from those being observed. In contrast, classical
physics rests on an idealization, he said, in the sense that it
assumes that the physical world has these properties in-itself, i.e.
as inherent properties, independent of their actual observation.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qm-copenhagen/
103
Bohm suggests that the whole universe can be thought of as a kind of
giant, flowing hologram, or holomovement, in
which a total order is contained, in some implicit sense, in each
region of space and time. The explicate order is a projection from
higher dimensional levels of reality, and the apparent stability and
solidity of the objects and entities composing it are generated and
sustained by a ceaseless process of enfoldment and unfoldment, for
subatomic particles are constantly dissolving into the implicate order
and then recrystallizing.
The quantum potential postulated in the causal interpretation
corresponds to the implicate order. But Bohm suggests that the quantum
potential is itself organized and guided by a superquantum potential,
representing a second implicate order, or superimplicate order. Indeed
he proposes that there may be an infinite series, and perhaps
hierarchies, of implicate (or "generative") orders, some of which form
relatively closed loops and some of which do not. Higher implicate
orders organize the lower ones, which in turn influence the higher.
Bohm believes that life and consciousness are enfolded deep in the
generative order and are therefore present in varying degrees of
unfoldment in all matter, including supposedly "inanimate" matter such
as electrons or plasmas. He suggests that there is a
"protointelligence" in matter, so that new evolutionary developments
do not emerge in a random fashion but creatively as relatively
integrated wholes from implicate levels of reality. The mystical
connotations of Bohm's ideas are underlined by his remark that the
implicate domain "could equally well be called Idealism, Spirit,
Consciousness. The separation of the two -- matter and spirit -- is an
abstraction. The ground is always one."
http://www.spaceandmotion.com/Physics-David-Bohm-Holographic-Universe.htm
104 Addiction is another completely unscientific concept. usually
applied in order to enforce socially approved behaviors; "addicts" and
"homosexuals" are, for example, the "carriers" of AIDS. See "Epidemics
of the Will," in Eve Kosovsky Sedgwick's Tendencies (Duke:1993)
105 An entity named Ramtha is channeled by JZ Knight in What the Bleep: "One of the great enigmas that
scientists have studied in the last decade is Ramtha, a mystic,
philosopher, master teacher and hierophant. His partnership with
American woman JZ Knight, his channel, still baffles scholars." [Ed:
It certainly baffles me-- see ramtha.com




El Abuelo (Grandfather)
An old-man figure called el abuelo (the grandfather) played the role of a bogeyman in Hispano folklore. In literature it is sometimes spelled aguelo, and some scholars speculate that it may be a borrowed word from the language of the Pueblo Indians. In Spanish it means “grandfather,” and has become synonymous with coco, cucui, and bogeyman. This folk character is more known in northern New Mexico than in other parts of the Southwest. He appeared at Christmastime to test and discipline children who did not know their catechism or prayers. He was a scary figure, dressed to terrify children with a black cape and a mask with large horns, and always carrying a whip. Children were terribly frightened because of his horrid appearance. Instead of a mask he sometimes had a tortilla plastered on his face, wore buffalo horns and a horsetail, and of course carried the whip. A few days before Christmas, he’d knock on the door of a home, give a bloodcurdling cry, crack his whip, and yell at the children, “Han sido buenos muchachos estos?” (Have these children been good?) The children would cringe and hide while the parents defended them. Then el abuelo would say, “Pues que recén y se acuestén” (Well, let them pray and go to bed). Sometimes he made the children dance Las Palomitas, loosely translated as “the little doves.” Espinosa describes this experience. “After making them pray, he makes them form a circle, and, taking each other’s hands, they dance around the room with him, singing,
Baila paloma de Juan turuntún (or durundún) [sic]
‘Turun tún tún
Turun tun tún!’
(Dance dove of Juan confused or disoriented
Confused, confused!)
(1910, 402)
A description of el abuelo making children “dance the little dove” is also available in Steele’s work (1992, 25). Throughout the year if children misbehaved, parents would threaten them, “Si no te sosiegas, llamo el abuelo” (If you don’t behave, I’ll call the bogeyman).
El abuelo is also a prominent figure in the dance of Los Matachines, and plays a comical role in which he makes jokes and shouts out instructions to the rest of the dancers. In some performances there is a female character, la abuela, who acts as el abuelo’s accomplice and plays a similar role. Although he is not heard of often in contemporary times, references to el abuelo can be found in the folktales and literature of New Mexico.
See also El Coco; El Cucui; El Kookoóee; Los Matachines
References Brown 1978; Cobos 1983; Espinosa 1910; Steele 1992
La Adelita (Mexican Revolution Woman Soldier)
A feminist symbol of the Mexican Revolution, La Adelita was the name of a woman soldier, a soldadera, who followed the troops, helped to set up camp, and cooked for the soldiers. Some soldaderas were employed to cook and fulfil the needs of a particular soldier, whereas others were relatives or lovers. The legend states that Adelita was a woman who fought in the Revolution, but it is not known if she actually existed as an individual; she came to epitomize all soldaderas and courageous women of that period. In popular culture, literature, and the cinema, soldaderas have been portrayed as self-sacrificing women, usually mestizas (mixed-race women) from the lower classes, but La Adelita is often seen as a güera (light-skinned), “sweetheart of the troops, a woman who is valiant, pretty, and a wonderful helpmate to the soldier” (Salas 121). Several corridos (ballads) have been written about her, and she is a powerful symbol for Mexican and Chicana women, representing bravery, self-discipline, and romantic love. In fact, it is primarily through the corridos that Adelita is known today. Historically, all soldaderas became known as Adelitas. In performances by ballet folklórico groups, the dances and music of the Revolution are often called Las Adelitas.
La Adelita is more than a romantic image to modern-day Chicanas. She continues to symbolize feminine independence, integrity, the fight for justice, and a proud heritage. Because the major influx of Mexican immigration into the United States was during the Mexican Revolution, many Chicanos and Chicanas grew up hearing stories about soldaderas and La Adelita from relatives, parents, and grandparents. In the late 1960s Chicanas who joined the Brown Berets de Aztlán, a political pseudomilitary youth group, often dressed as Adelitas, wearing rebozos (shawls) and bandoliers crisscrossed over their chests.
One play about La Adelita, titled Soldadera, written by Josephine Niggli, was produced and performed in the United States in 1936, and is still performed today. Niggli was 25 years old when the play was written. She went on to write Mexican Village, a novel that incorporated many of the Mexican people’s folk customs and traditions. Born in Monterrey, Mexico, she lived in Mexico City and was taught at home by her mother. Later she moved to San Antonio, Texas, where she attended high school. She went to the University of North Carolina for playwriting, sometimes acting in her own plays. Soldadera is a play about the women in the Revolution, “women who left homes to follow their men, cooking for them, tending their wounds, guarding their ammunition, fighting when necessary,” as Niggli put it. The Adelita character dies in the play, and Niggli idealizes her bravery.
One variant of the corrido “La Adelita” follows:
En lo alto de una abrupta cerrania
acampado se encontraba un regimiento
y una moza que valiente lo seguia
locamente enamorada del sargento.
Popular entre la tropa era Adelita
la mujer que el sargento idolatraba
porque a mas de ser valiente era bonita
y hasta el mismo coronel la respetaba.
Y se oía que decía aquel que tanto la quería. . . .
Y si Adelita fuera mi novia,
y si Adelita fuera mi mujer,
le compraría un vestido de seda
para llevarla a bailar al cuartel.
Y si Adelita se fuera con otro
la seguiría por tierra y por mar
si por mar en un buque de guerra
si por tierra en un tren militar.
(On the loftiest of the sierras
A regiment is camped
And a brave young girl follows
A sergeant that she crazily loves.
Popular among the troops was Adelita
The woman that the sergeant idolized
Because besides being brave she was pretty
And even the colonel respected her.
And one could hear him that loved her so. . . .
If Adelita was my girlfriend,
And if Adelita was my woman,
I’d buy her a silk dress,
To take her dancing at the barracks
If Adelita ever left with another
I would follow her by land and by sea
If by sea, in war ship, and
If by land on a military train.)
References Arrizón 1998; Herrera-Sobek 1990; Niggli 1938; Salas 1990
Adivinanzas (Riddles)
Adivinanzas are riddles. Many Chicano children remember being entertained with riddles narrated by parents and grandparents. A riddle is an intellectual brainteaser, in Spanish called a quebracabeza; facts are framed in the form of a question in such a way that the respondent cannot possibly know the answer. An example in Spanish is, “Qué camina de cuatro patas por la mañana, dos patas en el medio día, y tres patas en la noche?” (What walks on four legs in the morning, two legs in the afternoon, and three legs at night?) The answer is man, who as a child, in the “morning” of life, crawls on four legs; as an adult walks on two legs; and as an old man uses a cane for support, thus walking on three legs. Another example is a “true riddle,” which is a comparison of something to the unknown answer, and that something is described in the question. For example, “Tengo ojos y no miro; boca pero no hablo; qué soy?” (I have eyes and cannot see; a mouth, but cannot speak; What am I?) The answer is a photograph. Another type of riddle is the conundrum, where the answer is contained in the riddle itself, such as “Agua pasa por mi casa cate de mi corazon” (Water passes by my house pain of my heart). The answer is “agua-cate” (avocado). Or, “Lana sube, lana baja” (Wool goes up and wool goes down). The answer is “la navaja,” la-na-baja (the knife). Conundrums contain wordplay and in Chicano culture are sometimes bilingual, playing with words in both the Spanish and the English language. Another type of riddle is the riddling question, such as “Qué le dijo la luna al sol?” (What did the moon say to the sun?) The answer is “Eres tan grande y no te dejan salir de noche” (You are so big and yet are not allowed to go out at night).
Many Spanish riddles collected in the Southwest reflect in some way the characteristics of the Southwest, both linguistically and environmentally. Since the problem presented in a riddle is linguistically and culturally based on both the teller’s and the audience’s culture, they must all be members of the same community or group to comprehend the puzzle. Bilingual riddles, those narrated in both English and Spanish, are clearly a Chicano invention growing out of the bicultural experience. Riddles are fun and educational as well. It is usually children who enjoy telling and listening to riddles. Like other folklore genres, riddles serve a function, helping children learn to interpret facts and form an opinion. They use language, humor, and a verbal fun activity to challenge a child’s intellect.
References Brown 1978; Campa 1937; Espinosa 1985; Glazer 1994; Lucero-White 1941; McDowell 1979; West 1988
Adobe (Sun-dried Brick)
Adobe is a word with Arabic origins that means “unburnt bricks made from earth.” Adobe bricks are made from a mixture of clay and sand, sometimes just called mud-straw, and are slowly dried by the heat of the sun. Various structures, homes, buildings, and churches are built of adobe bricks and then plastered with more adobe mud. Buildings made of adobe have lasted for centuries when sufficient and constant care is provided to prevent erosion of the mud. Contemporary adobe architecture, as found in what is called the Southwest style, is a fusion of native New Mexican Indian and Spanish forms. The basic structure, adobe walls supporting a flat roof, is an Indian tradition thousands of years old. When the Spanish moved into New Mexico and the Southwest, they adopted this basic structure, but incorporated their technique of forming the mud into bricks. Most of the Catholic missions were built out of adobe. Adobe homes and buildings provide a sense of security and protection from outside noise with their two-to-four-foot thick walls. Often the literature about adobe also mentions the sense of continuity with the earth one feels when living in an adobe home.
Making adobe bricks and adobe hornos (outdoor ovens) is still a tradition in New Mexico. Native American and Hispanic women have a long tradition in the construction of adobe structures. The Spaniards noted that it was the Pueblo women who built the adobe walls. Within the Hispanic community it has been the role of women known as enjarradoras to plaster the walls of the structures, a task that is done with the bare hands. A saying in Spanish describes this as, “El hombre las levanta, la mujer las enjarra.” (The man builds the walls and woman plasters them) (Romero and Larkin 1994, 44). In contemporary times, the Museum of International Folk Art in Santa Fe sponsors demonstrations of adobe brick making and horno construction, performed by women who are well-known master adoberas (makers of adobe) and master enjaradoras.
In southern Texas and northern Mexico, small huts called jacales were also constructed of mud-straw. Even though this mud was of almost the same composition, it was not called adobe. The mud was not formed into bricks, and the structures were considered temporary, even though many have existed for decades.
References Boyd 1974; Brown 1978; Bunting 1964, 1974; De Leon 1982; Graham 1991; Romero and Larkin 1994; Weigle and White 1988; West 1988
Agavachado
See Agringado
Agreda, María de Jesus Coronel de (The Blue Lady)
A woman dressed in a blue veil or the blue habit of a nun who appeared to help the sick and the afflicted during the seventeenth century. Legends of the appearance of the Blue Lady circulated in New Mexico and Texas during the mid-1600s. There are stories that narrate how she especially liked to help women in need and poor children, although it appears her goal was also to Christianize the Indians of the Southwest, whom she visited often. She was able to speak various Indian languages and would speak to the members of each tribe in their own tongue. Fray Damian Manzanet, while visiting Texas in 1690, reported that the chief of the Tejas Indians spoke of being visited by a beautiful woman dressed in blue garments. The chief was requesting blue fabric that his people wanted to use in the burying of their dead. There is much written evidence of her appearances in Texas, where she was referred to as “The Mysterious Woman in Blue.” The Jumano Indians of Texas were reportedly visited by her approximately 500 times between 1621 and 1631.
The first reference to her is in the memoirs of Fray Alonso de Benavides in 1631. Every report we have of her appearances indicates that the Blue Lady was actually María de Jesus Coronel de Agreda. She was born in Spain in 1602 and died May 24, 1665. She never physically visited the Southwest, but she stated that she made “flights” to New Mexico to help the Indians. María de Agredo lived in a convent and wrote several books, including one with the title The Mystic City of God.
Adina de Zavala cites a San Antonio legend about a mystifying woman in blue who appears once in a generation, out of the hidden underground passages of the Alamo, bearing a distinctive gift that she bestows on a woman. The woman is always a native Texan; she may be young, old, or middle-aged, but she is always a special woman, “pure and good, well bred, intelligent, spiritual, and patriotic.” The gift that is bestowed on her is the ability to see “to the heart of things,” and the woman is instructed to use the gift for the good of the people of San Antonio and of Texas.
References Bullock 1972; Castañeda 1936; Colahan 1994; DeBaca 1988; Dobie 1964; Hallenbeck and Williams 1971; Sturmberg 1920; Zavala 1917
Agringado (Anglicized)
An expressive term used among Chicanos to describe other Chicanos who have become very gringo-like, very anglicized (inglesado), or americanizado. Another word used interchangeably is agavachado, meaning too much like a gavacho, an Anglo. In a bicultural environment, or even in tightly knit Mexican communities, when individuals become thoroughly acculturated to American society and values, the individual may be criticized by close friends and relatives, and be called an agringado. Agringado is a particularly strong term in comparison to americanizado, because the word gringo connotes a strong negative image of a North American. All Chicanos are americanizados to a certain extent, by learning English and attending public schools. But the behavior of an agringado might involve the changing of one’s given name, so that Carlos becomes Charlie, Guillermo becomes Will, or Consuelo becomes Connie; or changing a surname, so that Rivera becomes Rivers or Puentes becomes Bridges. In the verbal folklore repertoire of Chicanos, jokes abound about Mexicans who become Anglos and adopt the values, mannerisms, food, clothing styles, and verbal expressions of the dominant society. Besides becoming gringo-like, a Chicano agringado may overtly reject Mexican American culture, the music, the values, and even the Spanish language, by pretending not to speak it. Such a person sees the Mexican way of life as inferior to the Anglo, and the agringado may marry an Anglo and completely turn his/her back on Chicano culture. An agringado will not self-identify because this kind of behavior is perceived as negative or disloyal to his/her cultural group. Rather, identifying or pointing out agringado behavior tends to be done by family or peer group members, who use teasing, joking, and narrating exemplary anecdotes characteristic of folkloric behavior. This type of behavior is an outcome of living in a bicultural and bilingual environment and serves to strengthen the in-group’s sense of cultural identity.
The agringado figure has become a stock character in Chicano culture and is frequently encountered in folklore, literature, and popular culture. The film Mi Familia, directed and released in 1995 by Gregory Nava, includes a comical scene depicting the agringado son, a UCLA student, bringing his Anglo girlfriend home to meet his Mexican family.
References Limón 1988a; Madsen 1964; Peña 1985b
Aguinaldos (Christmas Gifts)
The translation of this word found in Spanish dictionaries is a “gift given at Christmas.” In the folk tradition, it is a small gift given at a Christmas party or celebration, usually in the form of food or candy. During Las Posadas, the reenactment of the pilgrimage of Mary and Joseph’s search for an inn, when celebrations are held in private homes, the hostess will pass out aguinaldos to the children. These can be small bags or baskets filled with candy, nuts, fruits, or toys. It is a gift given as a sharing, a memento, a remembrance, rather than as a Christmas present. Mention of the custom of aguinaldos is found in Cabeza de Baca’s book, The Good Life. Américo Paredes describes a slightly different tradition of aguinaldos that he learned in song form from his mother in South Texas. During the days between Christmas and Día de los Reyes (the Day of the Kings, or Epiphany), January 6, young boys went from house to house singing carols called aguinaldos, and asking for food and gifts. Homes were opened to them and they were offered good things to eat and drink. In this context aguinaldos are Christmas songs.
This expression has also been used when describing a children’s custom in the Southwest. On Christmas Day children went knocking on doors and visiting homes, asking for and receiving candy or small toys. Sometimes they would sing a song that sounded more like a prayer or a chant, called Oremos. Lottie Devine describes a custom in Arizona where the local Indians visited homes on Christmas Day, receiving food and drinks. This was referred to as “calling Christmas.”
See also Oremos
References Cabeza de Baca 1982; Devine 1964; Paredes 1976; Sommers 1995
Alabados (Hymns)
Ancient religious hymns that praises the Virgin Mary, Jesus Christ, or a patron saint. The Spanish word alabar means to praise, or to glorify, so most ala-bados start with the words “alabado sea” (praised be). Alabados are usually sung with religious fervor, and many are extremely long with an indefinite number of verses. The Penitentes of New Mexico were known to sing alabados during Lenten rituals, Holy Week processions, and other religious ceremonies. The songs are mystic in nature; many narrate the story of Christ’s life, his anguish, betrayal, his crucifixion and resurrection, and others praise the virtues of suffering and penance. Alabados were sung as ritual prayers in homes, at dawn, noon, and at nightfall, and they were almost always sung at funeral processions. Their melodies are fusions of indigenous music and medieval chants. Stories of Mexican California narrate the singing of alabados first thing in the morning by a family, each member in his/her own room, but all together at the same time. Like the décima (ten-line poetic song) and the romance (four-line song), alabados were introduced into the New World by the Franciscan padres, who taught them to the Indian people as they were teaching them the Bible and converting them to Christianity. In recent times alabados have come to mean any religious hymn sung at wakes or religious ceremonies. Many are very old and the authors unknown, although a few collected in southern Colorado were written by a local singer in the 1940s. Folklorists of the 1930s and 1940s were still able to collect some of these ancient hymns from elderly people who learned them from their parents in the nineteenth century. Juan Rael published one of the first essays on the alabado in 1950, and a recent researcher, William Gonzalez of the University of Utah, calls them “some of the saddest music” (Ingalls B11).
See also Los Penitentes
References Briggs 1988; Brown 1978; Espinosa 1985; Fisher 1958; Henderson 1937; Ingalls 1996; Rael 1950; Robb 1980

Alambrista (Illegal Border Crosser)
Literally, alambre is a wire, and an alambrista is a person who uses alambre. The term has come to mean a person who crosses a wire fence, regardless of the means or method. In this cultural usage the fence is the wire fence along the Mexican-U.S. border, the term is interchangeable with mojado (wetback), which refers to a person who enters the United States illegally by crossing the Rio Grande in Texas. Alambrista is not as common an expression as wetback, but it is used frequently by the media. The Mexican cinema has produced many films about illegal entry into the United States with many characters playing roles as alambristas. An American film with the title Alambrista! The Illegal, written and directed by Robert Young in 1979, deals with the issue of undocumented immigration by portraying the experiences of one man’s journey into the United States and back to Mexico. It is considered a landmark film because of the authentic portrayal of a life of fear and alienation experienced by the main character.
Like the term wetback, this is an expression many Chicanos can identify with since many have family members who have entered the United States through nonlegal means. It is part of the folklore repertoire of Chicano culture since the Mexican-U.S. border is politically and culturally a constant element in everyday life.
References Barrera 1992; Madrid-Barela 1975
All Souls’ Day 
See Día de los Muertos
Altars
An altar is a religious shrine (depending on its size, sometimes called an altarcito, a little altar) established in the home for the personal worship by the family. Home altars are common in many Mexican and Chicano homes. The word altar is derived from the Latin word altare, a combination of altus, high, and ara, altar, referring to a raised structure for worship, one that goes upward toward the sky or heaven. It provides a space where religious people can communicate with God, the saints, or other spiritual beings. Home altars vary in size, from a small shelf with one votive candle and one saint or statue, to a large table altar, with many religious images, La Virgen de Guadalupe, flowers, pictures of saints, candles; a structure that can fill up half a room. Permanent altars can be in a small nicho (niche) in the bedroom, the living room, or even the dining room. Daily devout prayer, such as reciting the rosary or praying to a patron or favorite saint, is a normal occurrence in many families, with the prayers often led by the mother or grandmother. A personal home altar may evolve over a period of years, rather than being constructed suddenly in one day. When the creation is such a gradual process, it can reflect and almost chronicle the happy and tragic events that take place in the family. As family members are born, or die, their picture or a favorite personal item of theirs may be placed on the altar, along with their patron saint, a votive candle, or flowers. Eventually, the altar can become so much a meaningful representation of the family that it will be maintained for years and even generations.
The religious observation of All Souls’ Day, or Día de los Muertos, on November 2, is an occasion for many families to erect altars specifically for a parent or other family member who has recently died. These altars will traditionally have a picture or pictures of the departed with offerings and gifts. Family and friends are invited to visit and add items to the altar, which becomes almost a shrine, and is called an ofrenda. In many U.S. cities Día de los Muertos ritual celebrations have become community affairs that include more than the Chicano community and may entail a procession through the streets ending at a local school or community center. In the last thirty or so years, the creation and construction of altars have become major art programs for museums, schools, and community centers in the United States. The altars are wonderful artistic creations, a form of folk art, with local artists participating and involving children in the making of calaveras (skeletons), papel picado (cut tissue paper), paper flowers, and other decorations.
In Chicano and Mexican culture it is usually women who develop home altars, as expressions of devotion, to pay homage to past family members, and to find a space for daily prayer. It is thought that home altars were created as a result of community isolation from a centralized place of worship. After Mexico gained its independence from Spain, the Spanish friars left Mexico and the Southwest and for many years there weren’t enough priests to visit all of Mexico’s small villages and rural areas. Isolated communities and individual families created their own places of worship. The wealthy or upper classes were able to build small chapels on their ranches, while the poorer classes built small nichos and altars in their homes, in kitchens or other rooms, for private prayer and devotion.
See also Calavera; Día de los Muertos; Folk Art; Nichos; Ofrenda; Papel Picado; La Virgen de Guadalupe
References Carmichael and Sayer 1991; Griffith 1988; Morrison 1992; Sommers 1995; Turner 1981, 1982, 1990, 1999; Viduarri 1991
Americanisms 
See Pochismos
Anglicized 
See Agringado
Anglo 
See Gavacho; Gringo
Arizona Folklore
A large portion of what is now Arizona was once considered part of New Mexican territory. As with Colorado, the folk customs, traditions, and language of Arizona have been closely related to those of New Mexico. The southernmost regions of Arizona, however, have always been more closely related to northern Mexico in customs, language, and folklore. After the U.S.-Mexican War of 1846–1848 and the signing of the Gadsden Treaty in 1854, Arizona experienced the same cultural changes as Texas, New Mexico, and California, although more gradually, since the region was not immediately overwhelmed by an Anglo American invasion as the other areas were. Arizona’s oldest and most important Mexican community has been Tucson, founded by Spanish settlers in 1775. Tucson was the frontier fortification of the Mexican state of Sonora until the Gadsden Purchase transferred it to the United States. It functioned as a cavalry outpost established in response to the many Indian raids of the times. 
Mexicans were a majority through most of the nineteenth century, and Tucson had a bicultural spirit that was unique in the Southwest. A Mexican middle class ran some of the largest businesses, held political offices, became artists or intellectuals, funded private and public education, and created a prosperous Mexican society envied by other communities of the Southwest, with elegant theaters like the Teatro Carmen and Spanish-language newspapers. Tucson’s proximity to Mexico, especially Sonora, permitted Tucsonenses to remain close to their Mexican heritage. According to Thomas Sheridan, “This Mexican elite represented a local florescence of Latin American civilization in Arizona, its society and culture linking Tucson with the finest traditions of both Mexico and Spain” (3). Although there was a strong Mexican middle class, many Chicanos were working class, such as butchers, barbers, and later railroad workers. The railroad arrived in southern Arizona on March 20, 1880, and this changed society in Tucson forever.
There has always been a substantial Chicano and Mexican population in Tucson. The folklore of the region was recognized to be important, and Margarite Collier, an elementary school teacher, organized a Mexican Folklore Club at Carrillo School in Tucson in 1935. An article in the Arizona Daily Star of December 19, 1943, states that the club was “to help the children sustain pride and interest in the traditions, customs and folklore of Mexico and to perpetuate these customs among Spanish-speaking people of Tucson.” Miss Collier taught the children music, art, and folk dances of Mexico. Every year the school organized a Las Posadas procession through the streets of Tucson. The same article in the Arizona Daily Star describes this celebration, with the subtitle of the article stating, “Ancient Mexican Custom to be Encouraged in Ceremonial Here.” The children of Carrillo School carried out this tradition until the late 1970s, and the Mexican Folklore Club continued until well after Miss Collier retired from teaching. Miss Collier worked at collecting songs, games, and other folklore from the children of the school. The Margarite Collier Collection of her private papers is housed at the Southwest Folklore Archives of the University of Arizona library.
James Griffith, a professor at the University of Arizona, is probably the scholar who has published the most on Arizona Hispanic folklore. He has written several works on the traditional folk arts of southern Arizona, a region that also includes the Pimas, Yaquis, and Tohono O’odham Native Americans and borders the Sonora state of Mexico. Griffith writes about the foods of the region, folk art, yard shrines, cascarones (decorated eggshells), religious practices, and the various musical traditions. Folklore collected by Griffith’s students is also housed at the Southwest Folklore Archives of the University of Arizona library.
Patricia Preciado Martin, born and raised in Arizona, has written extensively about the folklore and traditional past of the Mexican people of Arizona. She has collected oral histories and folktales from elderly Mexican Americans, many of them born in Arizona or Sonora, Mexico. These oral histories nostalgically narrate the lives of men and women born at the turn of the century, describing the rural way of life on cattle ranches and the early city life of Tucson.
Thomas Sheridan has written a social history of the Mexican people of Tucson from 1854 to 1941, thoughtfully showing the social and cultural changes that occurred to the Tucsonenses after the coming of the Anglo Americans. The religious and cultural life of the community is carefully researched and impartially presented. A very good description of the foods prepared by Tucson’s Mexican restaurants is provided in the work of Suzanne Myal. An early publication of Arizona folklore is a collection of songs published in 1946 titled Canciones de Mi Padre, by Luisa Espinel. An exhibit at the University of Arizona Museum of Art reviewed by Amy Kitchener shows the continuity between home and community folk arts. A recent article by Josiah Heyman presents a social history of Douglas, Arizona, presented through the oral histories of residents of that city during the first decades of the twentieth century.
References Campa 1979; Espinel 1946; Griffith 1985, 1988, 1993, 1995; Heyman 1993; Kitchener 1997; Martin 1983, 1988, 1992, 1996; Medina 1975; Myal 1997; Sheridan 1986; Sheridan and Noriega 1987; Tales Told in Our Barrio 1984

“Ay Vienen los Yankees!” (Here Come the Yankees!)
This title of a song from early Mexican California vividly expresses fear of the loss of the Mexican culture. The song expresses an aversion to the cultural invasion of the Americans along with a fear that the Mexican women may like the Yankees too much. This song was collected in southern California and according to Hague, the “words date from 1848 or about that time” (109). It is an example of a folk custom the Mexicans used to convey their antipathy toward the Anglo culture. It goes like this: 

Ay vienen los Yankees,
Ay los tienen ya 
Vienen a quitarles, la formalidad. 
Ya las señoritas que hablan el ingles, 
Yankees dicen “Kiss me!” 
y ellas dicen “Yes” 
Ay here come the Yankees, 
Ay they’re coming by
Now let’s all go easy on formality. 
See the señoritas who speak English now, 
“Kiss Me!” say the Yankees, 
the ladies answer, “Yes.” 
References Hague 1917; Schander 1994
Aztlán
According to an Aztec legend, Aztlán was the place from which the Mexica Aztecas came, known as the place of emergence, in some codices identified as the “seven-cave place.” The Mexica Aztecs traveled south under the guidance of the god Huitzilopochtli, who advised them to look for an eagle perched on a prickly pear cactus, devouring a serpent. This would be their new home, they were told, which they were to call Tenochtitlán.
In the late 1960s Chicanos starting calling the southwestern United States, or that portion of Mexico lost to the United States during the U.S.-Mexican War of 1846–1848, Aztlán, in reference to the legend of the wandering Mexica. The concept of a homeland for Chicanos called Aztlán was presented at the First National Chicano Youth Liberation Conference held in Denver, Colorado, in 1969. It was articulated in the manifesto, El Plan Espiritual de Aztlán, a document that outlined an ideology meant to unite all Chicanos of the Southwest. The document is accredited to Alurista, a poet who was already presenting Aztlán in a Chicano studies class he taught in 1968 at San Diego State University. The manifesto stressed the concept of ethnic nationalism and self-determination, and of the need for Chicanos to control their own communities, schools, and political structures. The document proclaims, “We are a Bronze People with a Bronze Culture. Before the world, before all of North America, before all our brothers in the bronze continent, we are a nation, we are a union of free pueblos, we are Aztlán. Por La Raza todo, Fuera de La Raza nada.” El Plan Espiritual de Aztlán was published in the journal El Grito del Norte, Volume 2, 1969. In 1970, a journal was started at the University of California, Los Angeles, titled Aztlán: Chicano Journal of the Social Sciences and the Arts, which is still published today.
The eminent professor Luis Leal states that Aztlán has two meanings for Chicanos: the geographic region of the southwestern United States and “the spiritual union of the Chicanos, something that is carried within the heart, no matter where they may live or where they may find themselves” (Leal 1995, 5).
Aztlán takes a prominent place in murals, folk art, and folklore, and it continues to appear in Chicano literature today, as it has for over thirty years, in poetry, short stories, novels, and essay anthologies. The title of one of Rudolfo Anaya’s novels is Heart of Aztlán, published in 1979; Miguel Mendez wrote Pilgrims in Aztlán first in Spanish in 1974, later translated to English in 1992; and Alurista has a poetry collection titled Floricanto en Aztlán, published in 1971.
Aztlán is the Chicano homeland, especially for those coming of age during the 1960s and 1970s, who wanted to create a cultural space that they could call their own. For Chicanos born in the United States, Mexico is not home, but neither is the United States, so Aztlán is looked upon as the mythical homeland. The affiliation with Aztlán also reaffirms the Chicanos’ identity as mestizos (people of mixed ancestry), as members of the indigenous population of the New World. Chicano writers explore the various meanings of Aztlán in an anthology edited by Rudolfo Anaya and Francisco Lomelí titled Aztlán: Essays on the Chicano Homeland.
References Anaya and Lomelí 1989; Barrera 1988; Bierhorst 1990; Chavez 1984; Leal 1995; Valdez and Steiner 1972.




In the late 1940s, Bond Stores, the largest men’s clothing chain at the time, created a sensation in New York City by offering a wide selection of suits with two pairs of pants instead of one, reintroducing a level of product choice not seen since before the war.1 When the line of hopeful buyers at its Times Square store stretched around the block, Bond had to impose a limit of two suits per customer. During World War II, the apparel and textile industries had been converted to supply field jackets, overcoats, and uniforms to the U.S. and Allied Forces. But in the years immediately following the war, returning soldiers, the end of rationing, and pent-up customer demand meant apparel was in short supply.
Fifty years later, it is hard to imagine a retailer—be it a high-end department store, mass merchandiser, or catalog service—limiting an individual customer’s clothing purchase. Retailers collect detailed point-of-sales information that reflects the real-time demand for goods by consumers. Through new computer systems, they share this information with suppliers who, in turn, can ship orders within days to automated distribution centers. The contemporary equivalent of Bond Stores now has a much better chance of avoiding stock-outs of popular items and the inventory gluts that lead to costly markdowns. By the same token, the overall risk associated with fickle consumers, numerous selling seasons, and segmented markets—along with fierce overseas competition—has currently made this a tough arena for American retailers and manufacturers.
The most surprising aspect of this story is that today’s U.S. apparel and textile industries—left for dead by business commentators and economic analysts in the 1980s—have begun to transform themselves, reaping new competitive advantages. Although Bond Stores’ customers were thrilled by a suit with two pairs of pants, contemporary customers want and expect a huge range of choices, and the consumer desire for limitless variety has kept the American apparel industry alive. In 1995, for instance, American consumers purchased 28.7 outerwear garments (all coats, jackets, shirts, dresses, blouses, sweaters, trousers, slacks, and shorts) per capita; in China the estimated number of such garments was only 2 per capita.2
The transformation of U.S. clothing and textile manufacturing is very much still in progress and has by no means been successful for every company; but these industries have entered a renaissance of sorts, one that reflects new information technologies and management practices as well as the new economics of international trade. This book describes what has happened since the postwar era in three related industries—retail, apparel, and textiles—and what such companies must do to improve performance. We cover the histories of these industries, including the information technologies that have transformed these enterprises, manufacturing processes, inventory management, the new role of logistics, and global trade implications and policies.
The story is a complex one, involving many individual cases and specifics. This study began with a focus on apparel manufacturing, but we soon concluded that apparel production must be viewed as an integral part of a channel. A channel is the set of all firms and relationships that get a product to market, including the original acquisition of raw materials; production of the item at a manufacturing facility; distribution to a retailer; sale of the finished item to the customer; and any installation, repair, or service activities that follow the sale.
A retail-apparel-textile channel typically includes the companies that manufacture synthetic fibers; produce, gather, and refine natural fibers; spin fiber into yarn; weave or knit yarn into fabric; manufacture buttons, zippers, and other garment components; and cut and sew fabric into garments. It also includes the retailers who sell garments to end consumers. The retail link often involves services or instructions to suppliers about fabric and garment design, packaging, distribution, order fulfillment, and transportation. And it is in some of these areas, particularly distribution and order fulfillment, that channel dynamics have undergone substantial change during the last decade.
Supply channels are not new, of course; for centuries, fabric-makers have sold their wares to those who cut and sew garments. But, until recently, most channels in the textile and apparel industries have been characterized by arm’s-length relationships among relatively autonomous firms. It is only since the mid-1980s that a number of market and technological changes have encouraged companies to enhance the links among different stages of production and distribution. Indeed, retailers like Wal-Mart Stores, Kmart Corporation, and Dillard’s Inc. have been the driving forces behind changes in manufacturing and logistics systems in a way that was unheard of in Bond Stores’ time. For instance, entrepreneur Sam Walton built a retail juggernaut that began with thirty-nine Wal-Mart stores in 1971 and grew to almost three thousand by 1996. He did so by insisting that suppliers implement information technologies for exchanging sales data, adopt standards for product labeling, and use modern methods of material handling that assured customers a variety of products at low prices.
We contend that this revolution in retailing practices will determine future competitive outcomes in retail-apparel-textile channels. These new practices—which we call lean retailing—have compelled apparel producers to reorganize the manner in which they relate to retail customers, undertake distribution, forecast and plan production, and manage their supplier relations. Lean retailing has also changed the way the textile industry relates to both apparel producers and retailers. Most important, because the apparel industry has been one of the first to face the full brunt of the retail revolution, its story illuminates pervasive changes under way in the entire economy.
In many respects, our findings defy the conventional wisdom. When we began our research, we were advised by American industry participants to establish better performance measures—for example, how many minutes does it take to make a shirt? The traditional view holds that because manufacturing performance is determined by the labor time required to produce an item, then what applies to cars, for example, can also apply to clothing; therefore, U.S. apparel manufacturers might be able to save themselves by improving assembly operations.3 Yet after years of studying hundreds of American apparel firms, we have found that direct labor content is not the primary issue. The companies that have adopted new information systems and management practices, participating in a well-integrated channel, are the ones with the strongest performance today—not those that have simply improved assembly operations.
The changes we examine in retailing are not only profound but rippling through a growing segment of the American economy. They have already transformed channel relations in such industries as food and grocery, home-building products, personal computers, and office products. The retail revolution is affecting the automobile, health care, and pharmaceutical industries as well. Now that manufacturers of power tools and ball bearings talk about their products as “fashion” items, the apparel industry—always subject to the whims of fashion—has much to say to any industry that involves retailing. Every channel has its particular history, elements, and dynamics, and retail-apparel-textile channels are no exception. A Stitch in Time uses the U.S. apparel story to highlight the transformation of retailing and manufacturing across the board.
Five Decades of Change
When Bond Stores had customers lining up around the block to buy suits, “casual wear,” as we know it today, did not exist. Even in the 1960s, men wore suits, ties, and hats to the ballpark, and women were clothed in dresses and millinery. As recently as 1969, the dress code at Harvard required undergraduate men to wear a collar, necktie, and jacket in the dining halls; women had to wear a dress or a skirt and blouse. It wasn’t until the 1970s that these vestiges of formality gave way to blue jeans and T-shirts—the casual wear uniform. The 1980s ushered in yuppie brands, and in the 1990s history repeated itself as baby boomers’ children adopted the bedraggled grunge look. Many business firms have “casual days” for office attire. Now six out of ten U.S. employers now have casual days in their workplaces, all but a few establishing this practice during the 1990s. About seven out of ten organizations with dress-down days permit employees to wear polo shirts, jeans, and sneakers.4
The U.S. apparel and textile industries, like the clothing and other products they produce, have undergone tremendous changes over the past half century. From 1950 to 1995, domestic production of apparel doubled, while textile production, less vulnerable to imports, increased almost three times.5 Yet since World War II, shifting tastes in clothes, rising real incomes, and domestic and foreign competition within the textile and apparel industries have markedly reduced the proportion of consumer budgets expended on apparel and its upkeep (laundry and dry cleaning). In December 1963, apparel’s share of the Consumer Price Index was 10.63 percent;6 by December 1995, that percentage had fallen to 5.52 percent of average household expenditures.7
Meanwhile, structural changes in the retail industry have influenced how and where clothing is sold. The growth of the highway system around central cities and the rapid expansion of suburbs created new opportunities for shopping centers, malls, and other outlets closer to a growing number of two wage-earner families. The metropolitan suburbs increased housing units in the 1950s through the 1980s far faster than the inner cities or the rural suburbs.8 Because inner cities retained a high proportion of lower income families, increased purchasing power for shelter, food, and clothing shifted to the suburbs. That means the large department stores traditionally based in cities, such as Macy’s or Marshall Field and Company—served by mass transportation and marketed through newspaper advertisements—suffered from the competition of mass distributors like Wal-Mart and specialty shops in new locations.
The enterprises that compose the apparel and textile industries manufacture a wide variety of products, and the mix has also changed since the postwar era. Over the past thirty-five years in the textile industry, the number of workers employed for carpet and rug production has doubled and is projected to expand further over the next decade. In the apparel industry, more than a quarter of all workers now produce nonclothing items like curtains, draperies, house furnishings, and automotive trimmings; once again, employment since the 1960s in these areas has doubled, while it has dropped off dramatically for actual garment-making.
These changes are related to new technology and foreign competition. Exhortations to buy the “union label” or “Made in the U.S.A.” have done relatively little to stem the tide of clothing assembled overseas. For example, the per capita number of outerwear garments purchased in the United States increased from 14.3 to 28.7 in the period from 1967 to 1995.9 Imports, however, provided half the total in 1995, leaving domestic production with only about the same per capita number of outerwear garments as three decades earlier10—all this, even though apparel and textiles in the United States have long been characterized by special import regulation. Tariffs on their imports have remained higher than many other manufactured goods. Since the 1960s, national policymakers have sought to moderate the growth of imports, primarily through agreements with other governments. The Multi-Fiber Arrangement (MFA), a network of bilateral agreements negotiated with participating nations which became effective in 1974, established quotas for imports largely related to estimates of the growth of the U.S. domestic market. The stated purpose of the MFA was to provide for the “orderly” growth of trade in these products among countries on a negotiated basis. Advocates emphasized that “textiles and apparel offer proportionately more jobs, including entry-level positions, to less well educated, more disadvantaged groups in the United States than most other sectors of the economy.”11
Yet with the signing of the agreements that grew out of the Uruguay Round of international trade negotiations that concluded in 1994, the MFA has now been replaced; textiles and apparel trade are to be integrated into the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) over a ten-year period that ends January 1, 2005. Many American industry participants and policymakers believe these changes could deal a fatal blow to the U.S. apparel industry, which will become even more exposed to global competition. The impact of these trade changes remains uncertain, and national policies that take them into account are still evolving. But if one did not consider the shift in retailing practices that is also recasting the apparel industry—and turned some American companies into unexpected leaders—it might indeed look like “Made in the U.S.A.” was a lost cause.
A Dying Industry—or Not?
For many commentators, a book about the future of the U.S. apparel and textile industries is still an oxymoron. The conventional wisdom paints a grim picture of where these industries are headed. Low-cost labor overseas and the increasing penetration of imports have certainly undercut American apparel manufacturers; apparel imports grew rapidly in most categories starting in the mid-1970s. If we measure import penetration in physical units (rather than dollar value),12 import penetration for men’s and boys’ suits, for example, went from just 10 percent in 1973 to 43 percent by 1996. A similar expansion in imports occurred for men’s and boys’ trousers, women’s and girls’ dresses, and women’s slacks and shorts.13
As one consequence, the number of business failures among U.S. apparel manufacturers climbed from 227 in 1975 to a high of 567 in 1993.14 Not surprisingly, employment in the apparel sector during this period declined appreciably. And the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projects a further reduction in the domestic apparel industry during the period 1996 to 2006 from 864,000 workers to just 714,00015—this from an industry that employed about 1.2 million employees in 1950 and reached a peak of 1.4 million employees in 1973.16
The conventional wisdom explains the industry’s decline in this way: Apparel, particularly women’s apparel, is driven by price-based competition among generally small manufacturing and contracting establishments.17 Labor costs represent a significant portion of cost for many garment categories,18 and U.S. wage levels far exceed those of competitors in countries like the People’s Republic of China and Mexico.19 Although the magnitude of these differences varies as exchange rates fluctuate, under any realistic exchange-rate scenario, the labor cost differential is sufficiently high to put U.S. manufacturers at a very significant competitive disadvantage.
The manufacture of men’s shirts provides another illustration. Throughout much of the post-World War II era, the majority of men’s shirts sold in the United States were white dress shirts, primarily through department stores. Shirts with stripes, patterns, and uncommon colors constituted less than 30 percent of all dress shirts sold through the 1960s.20 In this environment, low fashion content and limited product variety made demand for individual shirts relatively predictable. Store buyers succeeded by striking deals with apparel manufacturers for large shipments of white shirts at the lowest possible price and with long delivery lead times. Unlike the women’s industry, where style has always mattered more, relatively large men’s apparel manufacturers such as Haggar; Hart, Schaffner, and Marx; Fruit of the Loom; Arrow Shirt Company; and Hathaway Shirt emerged, seeking to capture economies of scale.21
But hourly compensation levels have increasingly hurt U.S. apparel-makers, if performance is principally determined on a price/cost basis. For example, because of wage differentials between the countries, U.S. apparel-makers would need to be 2.5 times more productive than firms in Hong Kong to be “competitive.” As a result, U.S. shirt manufacturers lost enormous market share to offshore producers. And employment in men’s and boys’ shirts between 1972 and 1996 declined an average of 3 percent a year.22
There is just one problem with these accounts. Although the production of basic white dress shirts may lend itself to a price/cost analysis, this “staple” good, like many staple goods, now constitutes only a small proportion of all shirt production: by 1986, little more than 20 percent of men’s dress shirts were white.23 This one-time staple has been replaced by shirts of dizzying diversity in fabric, design, and style, providing the final consumer with a huge assortment of shirts while exposing retailers and manufacturers to increased risk of holding large volumes of unsold goods. Classical economic assumptions about market competition are not directly applicable in this situation, even in a “mature” industry like apparel.
As shown in later chapters, manufacturers that invest in advanced information technologies and use them to change their methods of planning and production can significantly reduce the amount of inventory they hold, thereby reducing the need to mark down or write off unsold products at the end of a season. These manufacturers also earn twice as much in profits than suppliers that continue to operate along traditional lines. Yet the distinguishing feature of such high performers is not their success in shaving off labor costs in the assembly room; it is their effort in changing basic aspects of the way they manage their enterprises.
Although it is true that the American apparel industry could have given up in the early 1990s, with only distribution centers and designers remaining in this country, it did not. Instead, manufacturers have developed, or have been compelled to develop, a competitive service for retailers; best practice American producers can now deliver orders with just a few days’ notice, something overseas suppliers have difficulty achieving. These U.S. firms do so through electronic data interchange (EDI), automated distribution centers, and sophisticated inventory management—a triumph of information technology, speed, and flexibility over low labor rates.
The Channel Perspective: Five Propositions
So what has changed the prognosis for American apparel and textiles and provided new opportunities for these industries? The answer is not to be found simply in the clout of a few retailers or the use of bar codes or EDI. To understand why the apparel industry is a prototype for others, we need to look at the underlying dynamics of demand and its impact on manufacturing practice. Consider once again the contemporary customer’s appetite for variety. Increased rates of product introduction, product proliferation, and shortened product cycles mean that companies have to respond much faster to rapidly changing markets.
For our purposes, we can represent growing product diversity in the form of a “fashion triangle” (Figure 1.1). Apparel items at the very top of this triangle include dresses from Paris, Milan, and New York runways, which represent a very small share of apparel sold. The majority of fashion products also have a short selling life—usually one season—but are produced for a broader market. At the triangle’s bottom are basic products that remain in a retailer’s or manufacturer’s collection for several years, such as men’s white dress shirts or underwear. Basics -historically constituted the majority of apparel products sold. In the middle of the triangle are fashion-basic products, typically variants on a basic item but containing some fashion element (such as stonewashed jeans or khaki pants with pleats or trim). This expanding center of the fashion triangle indicates where the industry is headed. Because a growing percentage of basic apparel items have some fashion content, fashion-basic products are driving product proliferation.
Product proliferation and shorter product cycles, reflected in ever-changing styles and product differentiation, contribute to general demand uncertainty for both retailers and manufacturers, thereby making demand forecasting and production planning harder every day. In a world where manufacturers must supply an increasing number of products with fashion elements, speed and flexibility are crucial capabilities for firms wrestling with product proliferation, whether they are retailers trying to offer a wide range of choices to consumers or manufacturers responding to retail demands for shipments.
To be sure, technological advances in communication and transportation have helped supply channels operate more effectively and efficiently in providing diverse goods. Although these changes have provided strong motivation for increased channel coordination, the development and implementation of key facilitating technologies—like bar codes, the later spread of EDI, and automated distribution centers—have been the real movers here. New channel relationships, in turn, have led to better performance, based on a variety of standards, and enhanced the competitiveness of many sectors of these U.S. industries.
Note that these significant technological, market, and environmental changes largely originated outside the apparel industry itself. As we will make clear, changes that emerge in a market economy in one sphere often have unforeseen consequences in others. Bar codes, for instance, began with the food and grocery industry in the 1970s to lower the labor costs of cashier work and avoid delays to customers.24 With the commercialization of the laser, automated checkout became more than an industry vision. A committee of CEOs from grocery manufacturers, food chain stores, and other companies met in 1970 to develop a “universal product code” for scanning purposes: the first five digits stand for the manufacturer and the last five identify the item at the stockkeeping unit (SKU) level.25 All the digits are represented in the now-familiar sequence of light and dark bars of differing widths. By 1975, bar codes had begun to spread throughout food chain stores and grocery manufacturers. But almost another decade passed before the practice was adopted by apparel retailers and manufacturers.
In later chapters about the retail revolution, inventory management, and apparel operations, we provide an in-depth look at how such new technologies have affected the related industries. For now, we present five propositions that arise from the channel perspective of this book. The conventional wisdom can no longer predict future industry dynamics or offer guideposts for private and public policies. The channel perspective, however, indicates why the demand uncertainty and risk associated with today’s apparel industry offer new opportunities for U.S. firms.
Proposition 1:  The retail, apparel, and textile sectors are increasingly linked as a channel through information and distribution relationships.
In conventional terms, these three sectors are considered distinct industries, separated by traditional market relationships. For example, arm’s-length transactions between retail buyers and apparel sellers determine prices and quantities of goods to be delivered. Apparel companies periodically made deliveries based on these contracts and the transaction was then completed. In such a world, coordination problems between the parties were of little concern.
But, as we have already emphasized, this is not the real world of apparel today. At its most fundamental level, the channel perspective reflects a revolution in retail practices. These practices have resulted in the integration of enterprises at all stages of the distribution and production chain, because of the infusion of real-time information on consumer sales. Instead of gearing planning and production decisions to forecasts and guesses made months in advance of a selling season, firms now receive periodic ongoing orders based on actual consumer expenditures. And companies in transformed retail-apparel-textile channels have established a complex web of computer hardware and software, other technologies, and managerial practices that have blurred the traditional boundaries between retailers and suppliers.
Proposition 2:  For apparel manufacturers, the key to success is no longer solely price competition but the ability to introduce sophisticated information links, forecasting capabilities, and management systems.
The conventional wisdom holds that the basis of competitive performance for apparel manufacturers is lowest price—period. According to Martin Feldstein, then chairman of President Reagan’s Council of Economic Advisers,
The labor intensive [U.S.] apparel market cannot and should not compete with much lower cost labor elsewhere. The stuff depends on somebody sitting at a sewing machine and stitching sleeves on; it is crazy to hurt American consumers by forcing them to buy that at $4 or $5 an hour of labor. We ought to be out of that business.26
Fortunately, clothing production today is more than a simple price/cost game. Successful apparel manufacturers must now focus on their capability to respond accurately and efficiently to the stringent demands placed on them by new retailing practices. This requires establishing systems to handle electronic, real-time orders, as well as creating management and information systems capable of using incoming information to forecast, plan, track production, and manufacture (or source) products in a flexible and efficient manner. Needless to say, these new skills were not part of the management arsenal of traditional apparel firms.
Yet our research indicates that apparel leaders are building these new skills. Analysis of detailed industry data demonstrates that there have been substantial increases in apparel suppliers’ investments in information technologies, distribution systems, and other associated services during the same period that new types of retailing practices emerged. In addition, we have found that those firms under greatest pressure by innovative retailers have been the most likely to make such investments, as well as to invest in innovations in other stages of manufacturing. Most important, apparel-makers that have invested in major innovations to collect and use information perform much better than those that have done little to innovate production beyond providing basic information links to retailers.
Proposition 3:  The assembly room—the traditional focus of attention for industry competitiveness—can provide competitive benefits only if other more fundamental changes in manufacturing practice have been introduced.
The inputs to garment production are relatively straightforward: fabric, thread, accessories like buttons and zippers, labor, and a modest level of capital investment. The majority of input costs are composed of materials and labor. For example, close to 50 percent of the value of shipments for men’s shirts comes from the cost of materials, while 25 percent arises from compensation costs.27 Reducing textile costs is a viable option for larger apparel manufacturers; they can exert some pressure on suppliers because of the size of their orders. Small manufacturers, however, have few such options. As a result, the conventional method of unit cost reduction revolves, once again, around reducing labor costs. Because the largest labor cost is concentrated in assembly phases, the focus of most productivity efforts has been in the sewing room.28
Garment assembly is typically done by “bundle” production, which entails breaking garment-making into a series of worksteps or operations. Each operation is assigned to a single worker, who receives a bundle of unfinished garment parts and undertakes her single operation on each item in the bundle. Completed bundles are then moved forward to the next operator in the production process. To foster productivity (physical output per worker) and constrain supervisory costs, wages are paid on a piece-rate basis, providing incentives for rapid completion of the operation.
Many industry participants have sought to improve assembly productivity, the holy grail for U.S. manufacturers. This generally involves modifications to improve the efficiency of the bundle system, using a variety of methods: “engineering” the assembly process to reduce direct labor requirements for each step, changing the incentive rate to encourage workers to increase their pace, or adopting new technologies to substitute for labor-intensive assembly steps. It is true that through ongoing refinement of apparel assembly processes American manufacturers have been able to achieve some continuous improvements in labor productivity. The International Trade Administration of the U.S. Department of Commerce expressed this view in 1990 that
The producer who hesitates to employ new strategies will not likely survive, as expected innovations in technology dramatically alter the nature of clothing manufacture. Garment-making in its current labor-intensive form will eventually be phased out in favor of automated, robotized manufacturing, geared for almost instantaneous transition from one style to another. The difficulty of handling cut fabrics by machines may be resolved in the near future, and the quest for higher operating speeds will then receive more attention, taking production levels to new heights.29
Yet here the conventional wisdom misses other significant measures of performance. Managers in well-integrated channels pay attention to inventory costs, inventory replenishment practices, information reliability, and time to market rather than the traditional direct costs of labor and materials alone. In fact, competitive performance is already being driven less by how a company manages its assembly operations and more by how it manages the logistics of its operations as a whole. Our study shows that an apparel manufacturer can still be successful with a traditionally organized sewing room; a firm with innovative and productive assembly operations, on the other hand, may not be competitively viable if it has not invested in information links with retailers and other changes in management practices.
Apparel manufacturers are not the only ones learning this lesson the hard way. The emphasis on labor productivity that has preoccupied practitioners and analysts in many industries—such as the total labor minutes required to assemble a car—no longer makes as much sense now that information technology has revolutionized retailing in many product segments. For instance, the current labor costs associated with assembly constitute 40 percent of the final cost of a car. In contrast, distribution-related costs—those associated with the traditional structure of automobile retailing—constitute anywhere between 15 and 34 percent of final cost.30 It is little wonder that car companies are currently in the throes of radically restructuring their method of automobile distribution.
Proposition 4:  Instead of fashion as the saving grace of the channel, basic and fashion-basic products will prove critical to its long-term survival.
When people consider the U.S. apparel industry, they often think of New York City’s Seventh Avenue, which is driven by new design, constantly changing seasonal offerings, and a willingness by consumers to pay a premium for the cutting edge of fashion. New York City and Los Angeles continue to have a competitive advantage in this area because a large number of designers and manufacturers are located in these cities and can respond quickly to changing demands, as well as shape them. This infrastructure allows for “quick response” on the fashion end of the women’s and, to a more limited extent, men’s markets. Once established, a variety of proponents believe, the experience at the fashion end can be diffused downward to less fashion-oriented products. As a result, some of the fashion-oriented products that had been sourced offshore can then return to the United States.
Those with a pessimistic view of domestic apparel manufacturing often assume that the high fashion end of the industry (the “top” of the fashion triangle in Figure 1.1, page 9) may be its best hope because U.S. firms can capitalize on their proximity to market. The highly acclaimed report by the MIT Commission on Industrial Productivity, Made in America, concludes:
Apparel, textile, and fiber firms and retailers have recently joined to launch the Quick Response Program, designed to improve information flow, standardize recording systems, and improve turnaround time throughout the syste.  The program could be an important boon to productivity and competitivenes.  Will Quick Response succeed? According to industry experts, that depends on whether it diffuses down to the high-fashion, quick turnaround segments of the industry or, like much new technology in this industry, is adapted to suit the needs of firms still committed to mass production.31
Regardless of where Quick Response has succeeded, however, our research indicates that very different time-based competitive demands have emerged in the industry, driven not by voluntary acceptance of policies but by the changing nature of market competition among retailers. Rather than arising in the fashion, “Seventh Avenue” segment of the industry, the new form of retail competition involves basic and fashion-basic products like jeans, intimate apparel, and T-shirts—the bottom of the fashion triangle.
Basic and fashion-basic apparel categories now constitute the lion’s share of industry sales, accounting for approximately 72 percent of all shipments.32 This implies that a far larger portion of the industry may be viable in the long run than the part that could be saved by “quick response” at the fashion end.33 Bear in mind, however, that this viability depends on manufacturers using information to plan and execute production in a more sophisticated manner than usual for this and other industries.
Similar dynamics are cropping up in nonclothing areas as well. Grocery stores now stock a profusion of toothbrushes, Home Depot has shelves and shelves of different light bulbs, and Dell offers custom-configured personal computers. The growing presence of fashion-basic elements in myriad consumer products means that all retailers and suppliers may find new competitive opportunities using replenishment.
Proposition 5:  Even with full implementation of GATT, a viable apparel industry can remain in North America, drawing on a range of production processes in the United States, Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean, and Latin America.
When it comes to international trade agreements, the conventional wisdom sounds most bleak. It leads to stark conclusions about the long-term viability of the U.S. apparel industry, even with steps taken to improve assembly-room productivity and fashion-oriented quick response. The following comment is typical:
Among the factors that are expected to have a substantial impact on employment in the textiles and apparel industries, perhaps the most influential will be the trade policy agreed to in the GAT.  The apparel industry, which is far more labor intensive and less competitive internationally than the textile industry, will probably sustain most of the losses from the new trade environment.34
Even here, the channel perspective tells a somewhat different story. When domestic channels reduce lead times to market, particularly with basic and fashion-basic products, the comparative advantage of imports declines—despite the lower wage costs of foreign competitors, elimination of quotas on imports, and tariff reductions. This means that the U.S. apparel industry is not necessarily doomed by high direct labor costs, at least for certain products. In fact, we expect a resurgence in certain sectors because of the innovative practices being pursued by some manufacturers and their retailers.
To be sure, the international sourcing arrangements that have been created by retailers and manufacturers over the last twenty years reflect a quest for minimizing unit labor costs. But the long lead times they require will increasingly challenge such arrangements. Manufacturers and retailers that rely on international sourcing will therefore have to reassess the total costs associated with offshore production and revise existing arrangements.
Trade data already suggest a major restructuring in the sources of U.S. apparel imports. The surge in apparel imports in the 1980s came from low-wage countries, primarily the Asian “Big Four”—the People’s Republic of China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Korea. This group of nations provided 39 percent of all apparel imports in 1964 and 51 percent of all apparel imports by 1988 (measured in square-meter equivalents, a measure of quantity). But by 1996, the Big Four’s share of imports had fallen to 26 percent. Their U.S. share has been increasingly displaced by those of Mexico and Caribbean nations.35 Although these shifts in part reflect changes in U.S. trade policy, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), they fundamentally arise from new sourcing patterns attributable to channel integration and the consequent need for apparel items that can be delivered in a shorter time to the U.S. market.
The implications of these changes from a private and public policy perspective are enormous. Competing in the transformed retail-apparel-textile channel now requires a set of management practices for both domestic and international sourcing. A successful U.S. apparel-maker, for instance, may assemble basic men’s khaki pants in average sizes in Mexico, taking advantage of low labor costs as well as Mexico’s proximity to the maker’s Texas distribution centers; at the same time, this company can choose to manufacture products with more variable demand, like khaki pants with narrow waists and long inseams, in the United States, providing fast turnaround for retailers and lower exposure to inventory risk.
Going to India or China for low prices alone is no longer the smartest course of action for American manufacturers. Increasingly, they will factor in demand uncertainty and product proliferation when making such sourcing decisions. As we will discuss throughout, many of the capabilities required for this model of competition are new to the apparel industry. The post-GATT competitive arena will be extremely demanding, but, based on the innovations many U.S. manufacturers are making, we believe the American apparel industry has a future.
How This Book Is Organized
Because of our separate academic perspectives and disciplines, the research underlying A Stitch in Time comes from a variety of sources. Much of our analysis is based on detailed survey data we collected from 118 business units—a sample representing about one-third of the shipments—in the apparel industry. We supplemented the original survey with microdata collected from a variety of U.S. government and private sources. Our work also draws on numerous case studies of individual enterprises and data gathered at site visits. We have modeled specific channel dynamics in order to understand what optimal practices might look like as the channel develops over time. Finally, we have worked closely with business executives, government officials, labor leaders, and our academic colleagues to exchange views, test ideas, and refine our results on a continuing basis. The appendices present a list of acronyms, a description of the HCTAR survey and other data sources, and a list of companies that we visited or at which we conducted interviews with their executives.
A Stitch in Time is organized into five sections, roughly corresponding to the channel components. The first two chapters provide an overview and historical context. Chapters 3 through 5 analyze developments in the retail sector. Chapters 6 and 7 establish a bridge between retailing and apparel/textile operations through an exploration of the problems of inventory management—a central aspect of emerging channel dynamics. Chapters 8 through 10 focus on the apparel industry; Chapters 11 and 12 look at textiles. Chapters 13 through 15 examine the channel as a whole, from global, private-performance, and public-policy perspectives.
After this introduction, Chapter 2 (“The Past as Prologue”) offers a brief history of recent technological and human resource developments in retailing, apparel production—including the role of jobbers, contractors, and manufacturers—and textile enterprises. Here we make clear that the changes wrought by lean retailing echo the last industrial transformation, which occurred in the late nineteenth century with the advent of the railroad and telegraph.
In the retailing section of the book, Chapter 3 (“The Retail Revolution”) contrasts traditional practices with the emerging method of lean retailing, starting with a comparison of Wanamaker’s, the grandest store of its time, and the companies leading the current wave of retail restructuring. Chapter 4 (“The Building Blocks of Lean Retailing”) describes how the essential elements of lean retailing—bar codes, EDI, the modern distribution center, and standards across firms—fit together. Chapter 5 (“The Impact of Lean Retailing”) presents some of the key results of our survey, indicating how lean retailers have performed over the last decade and their effects on manufacturers and suppliers.
Next, we move to the inventory “bridge” between retailers and suppliers. Product proliferation has raised the uncertainty of overall demand faced by retailers and suppliers. Chapter 6 (“Inventory Management for the Retailer”) looks at formal models of retail inventory management and discusses how they have been modified by lean retailing practices. Chapter 7 (“Inventory Management for the Manufacturer”) switches to the supplier’s point of view. Because dynamics are shifting in the channel, many suppliers are confronting new inventory challenges in their efforts to replenish items rapidly for retailers. We present two cases that emphasize the importance of using weekly demand variation for different items to help manufacturers set optimal inventory policies. This chapter also describes a new approach to production and sourcing strategies, one that balances traditional and short-cycle production lines.
The next three chapters are devoted to apparel operations and related human resource practices. Chapter 8 (“Getting Ready to Sew”) describes the preassembly steps of apparel design, marker-making, and cutting and how they are adapted to new areas like mass customization. Chapter 9 (“Assembly and the Sewing Room”) examines the technical aspects of sewing—from different kinds of sewing machines to what sewing operators do—and alternative ways of arranging the flow of assembly operations through an apparel workplace. Chapter 10 (“Human Resources in Apparel”) considers the impact of alternative methods of assembly—especially modular, or team-based, production—on firm performance. We also discuss why human resource policies cannot be treated separately from other business decisions regarding rapid replenishment.
In the textile section, Chapter 11 (“Textile Operations”) describes the technological processes involved in converting fibers to a vast range of woven and knit products. The textile sector has changed remarkably since World War II, in part because of the capital intensity and technological sophistication of textile equipment, much of which is automated. Chapter 12 (“The Economic Viability of Textiles”) places U.S. textiles in an international context, detailing the ways in which the domestic industry has adjusted over the past several decades through dramatic productivity enhancement. Because textile firms are increasingly supplying retailers and industrial users directly, as well as producing fabric for apparel-makers, we also address the multiple channels evolving in this sector.
A Stitch in Time concludes with a look at the many factors shaping today’s retail-apparel-textile channel—from the complex management challenges facing suppliers to labor standards and macroeconomic policy. Chapter 13 (“The Global Marketplace”) reviews trends in U.S. imports and exports of apparel and textiles, including information on trade by countries and specific products. It then connects these trends to changing trade policies, emphasizing the growing regionalization of trade flows in different parts of the world. Chapter 14 (“Suppliers in a Lean World”) examines our survey results from another angle, evaluating firm performance in an integrated channel. Here we highlight the importance of combining information technologies, manufacturing innovations, and new methods of management to respond to lean retailing demands.
Finally, Chapter 15 (“Information-Integrated Channels”) touches on a number of public policy issues raised by our findings. These include what can be done about the continuing problem of sweatshops, the new international economics of trade, and the effect of information integration on the business cycle and consumer prices at the macroeconomic level. Last but not least, we take a realistic look at the competitive future of the U.S. retail, apparel, and textile industries.
The information-integrated channel, with its emphasis on time and product perishability, is the basis for our cautiously optimistic—and unconventional—outlook. Even more important, the forces examined in this book provide a glimpse into processes reshaping a considerable portion of the economy. Consumers no longer line up for a special suit at a store like Bond Stores; they also expect an ever more “fashionable” array of cereal products, computers, and automobiles. As the next chapter shows, the changes now under way have their roots in new technologies, just as technical advances in transportation and communication shifted the industrial landscape at the end of the last century.




In my three decades of teaching university courses in child development, I have come to know thousands of students, many of whom were parents or who became parents soon after completing my class. I also served on boards of directors and advisory committees for child-care centers, preschools, elementary schools, and parent organizations. And my research continually drew me into classrooms, where for countless hours I observed and recorded preschool and school-age children’s activities, social interactions, and solitary behaviors, in hopes of answering central questions about how they learn.
As a byproduct of those experiences, parents repeatedly approached me with concerns about how to foster their child’s development in the early years. Their fervent questions, at times riddled with doubt and anxiety, revealed that creating optimum learning environments for young children at home—and ensuring their access to development-enhancing experiences in child care, preschool, and school—have become mounting parental challenges. 
Consider the following problematic situations that parents recently raised with me:

•Bob and Sharon, parents of a 4-year-old: Our daughter, Lydia, could recite her ABCs and count from 1 to 20 by age 2 1/2. When we looked for a preschool, many programs appeared to do little more than let children play, so we chose one with lots of emphasis on academics. To me, Lydia’s preschool seems like great preparation for kindergarten and ﬁrst grade, but each morning, Lydia hates to go. Why is Lydia, who’s always been an upbeat, curious child, so unhappy?
•Angela, mother of a 4-year-old and 6-year-old: My husband and I have demanding careers and need to bring work home in the evenings. I’ve read that it’s the quality of time we spend with our children that’s important, not the quantity. We try hard to give Victor and Jeannine our undivided attention, but they’re often whiny, demanding, and quarrelsome. Many times we end up sending them to their rooms or letting them watch TV, just to get some peace after a long day. What’s the best way to create quality parent–child time?
•Talia, mother of a 7-year-old: My son Anselmo, a ﬁrst grader, constantly asks us to help him with his homework. His father ﬁrmly insists that he do it by himself. Anselmo tries, but he gets so frustrated and upset that I move in and help, even in the face of opposition from his dad. By that time, Anselmo is on such a short string that I do most of the assignment for him. Should we be helping Anselmo with his homework and, if so, how?
•Noah and Suzanne, parents of a 2-year-old: When our parents were raising us, they seemed conﬁdent of their power and inﬂuence. Recently we read that how children turn out is mostly written in their genes; there’s little we as parents can do about it. Does parenting really matter?


baffled, bewildered parents

Despite being well educated, intent on doing what’s best for their children, and enlightened by a vast literature of child-rearing advice, many American parents appear uneasy and unsure of their roles at best, baed and bewildered at worst. As the above sampling of concerns reveals, today’s parents are not just worried about major transitions and traumas, such as the impact of marital breakup or community violence. They agonize over commonplace, recurrent, everyday situations—whether intensive preschool academic tutoring is crucial for later success in school, the meaning of “quality time” with children, and whether and how to help their child with homework. At an even more fundamental level, contemporary parents have begun to doubt their own ecacy in their children’s development. Why is this so?
The reasons, I believe, are twofold. First, rapid societal changes have complicated parents’ task, making child rearing more challenging than in previous generations. Second, information about child development disseminated to parents is increasingly voluminous but at the same time contradictory. It fails to oer a clear, consistent vision of good child rearing to guide daily decision making and practice. Let’s take a closer look at these sources of parental frustration and confusion. 

Societal Changes

Over the past three decades, external forces impinging on the family have transformed parents’ and, therefore, children’s lives. Overall, parents complain that they have less free time to spend with their children.1 Witness a 1995 survey of a large, representative sample of American workers, nearly 25 percent of whom expressed the feeling that the demands of their jobs left them with “no time for family.”2 Compounding their worries, employed parents must, out of necessity, turn over many hours of child rearing to other adults. Yet once their children are beyond their grasp, they are hardly o the hook! Conscientious parents face an added responsibility: monitoring their child’s whereabouts and activities, verifying from a distance that their youngster is physically safe, emotionally contented, and constructively engaged. 
Although many societal conditions heighten parents’ struggle to rear psychologically healthy children, two are especially pernicious, aecting even parents who manage to escape the trials and tribulations of divorce, single parenthood, stepchildren, serious ﬁnancial worries, and other family stresses. The ﬁrst is the dire shortage of acceptable child-care options in the United States, the second is the parental dilemma of “never enough time.” In view of these diculties, it is little wonder that so many American parents express a sense of powerlessness and inadequacy when it comes to aecting their children’s development. 

the problem of child care.  In 1970, 30 percent of mothers with pre-school children were in the labor force, a ﬁgure that increased more than twofold, to 62 percent, by 2000.3 An obvious solution to reconciling parents’ employment needs with young children’s rearing needs is to make high-quality, nonparental care, with characteristics known to promote healthy psychological development, widely available and aordable. In Australia and Western Europe, child care is nationally regulated and liberally funded to ensure that it conforms to standards veriﬁed by research to foster children’s learning, social competence, and emotional security.4 
Without a nationally regulated and generously subsidized child-care system, formal child care in the United States is in much shorter supply and considerably more costly for parents than it is in other industrialized nations. And as our discussion in Chapter 6 will reveal, on the whole, the quality of American child care—whether center-based or home-based—is mediocre to abysmal.5 Indeed, so widespread is poor-quality child care in the United States that Americans have acclimated to it. In a recent survey of parents whose children were enrolled in several hundred randomly chosen child-care centers across four states, over 90 percent believed that their preschoolers’ experiences were far better than experts in early childhood development judged those experiences to be.6 Parents seemed unable to distinguish “good” from “substandard” care. 

the “time bind.”  Like many parents, Angela, who raised the question of quality time, complains of being “torn in many directions.” Often she leaves work in a hurry in the late afternoon to pick up Victor and Jeannine from child care, dashes to Victor’s tumbling class or Jeannine’s piano lesson, then stops at the grocery store to pick up something for dinner. When Angela and her husband, Tom, walk through their front door, they typically head to the phone or fax machine to take care of unﬁnished work while trying to quell Victor and Jeannine’s hunger and irritability with a frozen dinner popped into the microwave and unlimited access to the TV set. Caught in a ceaseless sprint to reconcile job, marriage, and parenting, Angela and Tom feel drained at the end of the day—too tired to grant their children more than 10 or 15 minutes of focused time. When Victor and Jeannine do get their parents’ undivided attention, they are argumentative and unruly, compounding their parents’ fatigue and impatience. 
Angela and Tom represent a growing number of American parents who try to pencil children into busy schedules, much like a business appointment. They love their children, but they also love and need their work, for personal and ﬁnancial reasons. Hence they ﬁnd themselves in a juggling act between the two, with work usually winning out. Tomorrow will be another day for the kids, they rationalize, but a business deal or a professional achievement, if not capitalized on at the moment, may evaporate. Their logic dovetails with the concept of “quality time” for children. In its commonly accepted meaning, quality time refers to an intense but brief contact. The term is a ready salve for the consciences of conﬂicted parents, who squeeze in a few moments with their children, catch-as-catch-can, yet sense deep down that they are robbing their youngsters—and themselves—of something vital.
The expression “quality time” dates back to the 1970s, a decade that witnessed the largest rise in women’s participation in the labor force during this century. The notion was bolstered by observational studies of parent–child interaction. In these investigations, some parents exchanged positive emotional signals with and verbally stimulated their infants, and read to and conversed with their preschoolers. Other parents spent time with their children but were not actively engaged with them. Time and time again, children of the first set of parents developed more favorably, cognitively and socially, than did children of the second set of parents.7
A close look at the research reveals that children who fared well experienced eective interaction over an extended period. In studies following children from infancy into childhood and adolescence, early brief episodes of parental stimulation and sensitivity did not result in more competent children.8 Instead, positive, supportive parenting that endured, even when it marked a change from an early period of parental retreat or negative interaction, was linked to favorable child development, including persistence in problem solving, high self-esteem, socially skilled behavior, closer friendships, and better peer relationships.9 In sum, high-quality involvement with children requires a certain quantity of time—actually, a great deal, as I’ll argue in this book.
In Angela and Tom’s case, sandwiching concentrated time with Victor and Jeannine between work and other obligations, which often took precedence over family rituals, meant that routines that signal parental caring and that are major sources of development went by the wayside. For example, family dinnertimes and storybook reading at bedtime became rare events. So did the sheer enjoyment that comes from relaxed parent–child play; a joint cooking, art, or construction project; and a conversation based on real listening and exchange of ideas. Because these experiences were so few and short-lived, Angela and Tom were deprived of valuable opportunities to observe their children closely and to become intimately familiar with their talents, shortcomings, preferences, styles of learning, and ways of coping with hardship—knowledge that is crucial for helping children develop into mature, competent individuals.
Furthermore, the “time bind” stiﬂes an essential child-rearing responsibility that I mentioned earlier and will return to again: monitoring children’s experiences while they are both within and beyond parents’ immediate reach. This includes frequently touching base with nonparental caregivers and teachers to ﬁnd out what’s happening at child care or in the classroom; looking in on sibling and peer interaction to make sure that it is positive and respectful; and controlling time spent watching TV and playing video games.
In a recent provocative study, sociologist Arlie Hochschild spent months getting to know employees at a large Midwestern corporation she called Americo. Whether clerical workers or executives, the majority conﬁrmed the parental state of mind just described: They complained of overly long workdays and frenetic home lives. A surprising ﬁnding, however, was that few Americo workers had taken steps to make work and family more compatible. For example, even well-paid employees were not taking the annual six weeks of federally guaranteed, unpaid family leave time, although they could aord to do so. Nor were they asking for job share or ﬂextime, prominent company policies aimed at increasing the compatibility of work and home. Hochschild concludes, “Many working families are both prisoners and architects of the time bind in which they ﬁnd themselves.”10 
As homes become frenzied places in which work encroaches on family time and parents are too exhausted or preoccupied to be physically and psychologically available, children quickly become discipline problems. Their disagreeable behavior often causes parents to retreat further into the haven of work. On the job, such parents feel competent and gratiﬁed; home has turned into a place where they are harried, annoyed, and must deal with children who sulk, complain, plead for gifts, and are obstinate until they get their way—reactions that cry out, “Fifteen minutes, here or there, with an essentially distracted parent, is not enough.”
Fortunately, not all reports are as disturbing as Hochschild’s. Psychologist Rosalind Barnett and journalist Caryl Rivers conducted extensive interviews with 300 dual-earner couples in the Boston area and found that despite stress at work and at home, most were highly satisﬁed and found child rearing to be both manageable and pleasurable.11 And in a survey of 6,000 employees at DuPont, nearly half—and only slightly more women than men—turned down upward career moves to remain in jobs that allowed for more family commitment.12 Barnett believes that parents most prone to a time bind in which work robs family life are at higher socioeconomic levels—in more pressured jobs that have less clearly deﬁned limits and in which advancement typically depends on superlative performance. Ironically, she notes, economically less well o parents ﬁnd it easier to establish a viable dividing line between workplace and home.13
Although the precise extent of family–work conﬂict in American culture is not clear, its presence and detrimental impact on parent-child interaction and children’s development are well founded. Consider a series of studies that examined length of maternity leave in relation to employed mothers’ psychological well-being and parenting behaviors. Short leaves of 6 weeks or less (the norm in the United States) were linked to maternal anxiety and depression and negative interactions with babies. But longer leaves, of 12 weeks or more, predicted favorable maternal mental health and sensitive, responsive parenting. 14 
Furthermore, long hours in child care during infancy and the preschool years are linked to less favorable parent–child interaction. One study included repeated observations of more than 1,200 mothers, of diverse socioeconomic and ethnic backgrounds, playing with their children between 6 months and 3 years of age. The more time children spent in child care (which ranged from 0 to 50 hours per week), the less positive and responsive their mothers’ behavior tended to be. Children experiencing less positive interaction were less engaged with their mothers—more negative in mood and less aectionate.15 Yet another study—this time, of 3- to 5-year-old ﬁrstborn sons—suggested that long child-care hours can translate into behavior problems. Mothers and fathers of boys with many hours in child care interacted less favorably with their sons. And such parents reported more noncompliant, deﬁant child behavior. 16
These ﬁndings are not an indictment of maternal employment or nonparental child care. Rather, they underscore the importance of considering the needs of children when making work and child-care decisions. Studies carried out during the 1970s and 1980s on the relationship of maternal employment to children’s development revealed many positive outcomes—higher self-esteem, better grades in school, more positive family and peer relations, and less gender-stereotyped beliefs. 17 But repeatedly, eective parenting mediated these favorable developments. 
Employed mothers of cognitively competent, well-adjusted children value their parenting role and succeed at coordinating it with job responsibilities. Such mothers schedule regular times to devote to their children and combine warmth with consistent expectations for mature behavior. 18 Consider a study of the relationship of maternal employment to ﬁrst graders’ academic and social competence. Children of working mothers were equally or more competent than children of homemakers only if the children frequently experienced mother–child shared activities, such as warm conversation and play. Shared activities were especially crucial for children of mothers who had increased their hours of employment during the preceding 3 years, often from part-time to full-time. When a change in employment status was associated with high mother–child engagement, children fared well. When it led to reduced mother–child engagement, children’s competence suered greatly.19
Fathers’ involvement in child rearing is an additional route to positive outcomes for children. Although women devote more than three times as many hours to child care as men do, fathers’ involvement has risen in recent years.20 Children of highly involved fathers score better on measures of intelligence, school achievement, mature social behavior, and ﬂexible beliefs about gender roles—in short, on all the positive outcomes associated with maternal employment.21 When mothers and fathers support each other and share child-rearing responsibilities, both engage in more eective parenting.22
In sum, increasingly pressured adult lives have contributed to parental diculties in granting children the attention they need. When employed parents spend generous amounts of time engaged with their child, they safeguard the child’s development. Under these conditions, children often reap extra beneﬁts from more equitable involvement of both parents. In contrast, a pressured work life that pulls parents away from child rearing undermines infants’ and children’s well-being—cognitively, emotionally, and socially.
Probably because it reduces work overload, part-time maternal employment is associated with better academic and social development than is full-time employment.23 Unfortunately, most American employers do not provide this option, and many parents—especially, single parents—cannot aord it. Yet as noted earlier, ﬁnancially well-o parents are especially prone to the “time bind” but do not necessarily take advantage of available workplace options aimed at lessening it.

Child-Rearing Advice

Almost all parents—especially ﬁrst-time parents—feel a need for sound advice on how to rear their children. The demand for expert advice is particularly great today, perhaps because parents, teachers, and the general public perceive that children’s problematic behavior has increased. Widespread parent and teacher opinion, gathered from nearly 700 respondents in 1976 and again in 1989, revealed that during this 13-year period, children were viewed as more likely to “do poorly on schoolwork,” “hang around with peers who get into trouble,” and “destroy things belonging to others.” Fewer were seen as involved in worthwhile activities that truly engaged them.24 A 1997 survey of 4,500 American adults, 2,500 of whom were parents, echoed this disheartening trend. Most viewed today’s youngsters as too out-of-control and undirected.25
The call for parenting advice has led to a proliferation of volumes, ﬁlling shelf after shelf in virtually every general-purpose bookstore and public library. The “correct methods” advocated in these books vary widely, with many addressing discipline and communication, thereby catering to rising numbers of parents with undercontrolled, apathetic, non-goal-directed children. Precious few of these parenting manuals are grounded in the explosion of contemporary research on child development that is of signiﬁcant applied value. Rather, a plethora of opinion is available, some of it playing on and exacerbating parents’ self-doubts with such titles as Parenting for Dummies and The Seven Worst Things Parents Do.26 

one-sided views.  Well-known theories of child development—Freud’s, Skinner’s, Gesell’s, and Piaget’s, for example—provide little comfort, since dramatic shifts in favored theories have occurred since the launching of systematic study of children about 100 years ago. Indeed, this waxing and waning of theories has contributed greatly to discrepancies in expert child-rearing advice, which (like the theories) has ﬂuctuated between extremes—swinging, like a rhythmic pendulum, from an adult-imposed, directive approach to a child-centered, laissez-faire approach, and back again. As one recent analyst commented, theories and the popular literature for parents “have done their share to undermine the wavering self-conﬁdence of American parents.”27 The roots of these polarized perspectives can be found in centuries-old, dramatically opposing philosophies about the nature of children and child development.
Adult Supremacy. Writing at the end of the seventeenth century, British philosopher John Locke characterized the child as a tabula rasa. Translated from Latin, this means “blank slate” or “empty container,” a being who can be freely “written on,” or “ﬁlled,” with socially acceptable knowledge and skills—in essence, molded in any way adults might desire through careful instruction, eective example, and rewards for good behavior. Lockean ideas provided the footing for American behaviorism, launched by John Watson in the early 1900s and built by B. F. Skinner into a powerful mid-century theoretical force heralding the supremacy of environment in its belief that behavior is shaped by external stimuli. 
By the 1920s and 1930s, millions of parents had adopted behaviorist procedures in one form or another. The most committed were well-educated mothers, who read about conditioning methods in magazine articles and government bulletins on child care. Heeding Watson’s warnings about the dangers of overindulgence, parents mapped out schedules and routines for their young children and tutored them in all manner of skills and in self-controlled conduct. In preschools and kindergartens, behaviorist tenets were used to justify large-group drill on letters, numbers, and general knowledge as well as repetitive worksheet practice that required young children to sit at their desks for long periods, ﬁlling in blanks, coloring within the lines, and otherwise following teacher prescriptions. 
Parents anxious for their children to display mature behavior were convinced that these experiences would prime them for academic success. But research eventually documented otherwise—that regimented tutoring not adjusted to the child’s interests and capabilities undermines rather than enhances learning, motivation, and self-control. In preschools and kindergartens where much time is spent sitting, listening to teachers, and doing worksheets, children exhibit high levels of stress behaviors, such as wiggling, withdrawal, and talking out. They also show a decline in self-conﬁdence and motivation, expressing doubts about their own ability and retreating from challenging problems. Furthermore, when followed up during the ﬁrst few years of school, children who spent their kindergarten year in a highly teacher-directed classroom achieve more poorly than do agemates who come from kindergartens emphasizing play and hands-on, small-group projects.28
Recall 4-year-old Lydia’s dislike of her academic preschool, described at the beginning of this chapter. Lydia’s negative reaction is certainly consistent with research ﬁndings. The behaviorist presumption that development can be mechanically engineered by social input, guaranteeing brighter, socially more mature children, is not borne out by the evidence.
Child Supremacy. Countering Locke’s image of an all-powerful adult tutor, eighteenth-century French philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau conceived of the child as a “noble savage”—untamed but naturally good, with an innate plan for orderly, healthy growth. According to Rousseau, adult training served only to thwart the child’s inherently perceptive intelligence and moral sense, which unfolded naturally as children moved through a sequence of developmental stages. 
The Rousseauian view provided the substrate for the twentieth-century counterpoint to behaviorism: a belief in the powerful role of children’s inborn characteristics. At mid-century, Freud’s psychoanalytic theory vied with behaviorism’s reinforcement principles for parents’ and educators’ attentions. In the tradition of Rousseau, the psychoanalysts argued that powerful biological forces channel development through four psychosexual stages. Although psychoanalytic theory embraced a far less benign view of the child’s “instincts” than did Rousseau’s philosophy, Freudian ideas were nevertheless strongly child-centered in declaring that not much could be done about the child’s basic nature. According to this view, the child’s sexual and aggressive urges must be harnessed in the interests of society, but socializing too early or insistently can cause serious inner conﬂict and psychological disorder. Therefore, psychoanalytic experts advised parents to avoid the trauma of heavy adult demands and accept children’s intrinsic dispositions and tendencies.29
The Rousseauian child-centered theme surfaced, as well, in the realm of the child’s intellect. Swiss biologist Jean Piaget, twentieth-century giant of cognitive development, proposed a theory in which an intrinsically motivated child acts on the world, noticing discrepancies between the environment and inner structures, or ways of thinking. Gradually, the child transforms those structures so they better reﬂect reality and permit more ﬂexible, ecient thinking and problem solving. 
According to Piaget, as the brain matures and children’s experiences expand, they move through a sequence of four cognitive stages, or reorganizations of thought: (1) sensorimotor, the stage of infancy, in which babies use their senses and movements to explore the world; (2) preoperational, the stage of early childhood, in which preschoolers use symbols, especially language and make-believe play, to represent their earlier sensorimotor discoveries, but thinking lacks the logic of older children; (3) concrete operational, in which cognition is well organized and logical but limited to coordinating only two or three variables when solving problems; and (4) formal operational, the stage of adolescence, which opens up the capacity for abstraction, permitting young people to coordinate an increasing number of variables and to imagine all possible outcomes in a problem, not just the most obvious.30
In contrast to the behaviorist emphasis on adult tutoring, Piaget believed that since development follows a natural, internally controlled stage sequence, what comes from within the child is paramount in guiding cognitive change. The environment, including the social environment, is available for children to interact with as they make sense of their experiences, but it does not determine the evolution of the child’s mind. Instead, Piaget argued that children are in charge of changes in their own thinking and that biological readiness enables them to capitalize on a wider array of environmental opportunities, both physical and social, in revising inadequate, incorrect mental structures and creating new ones.
Piaget’s contribution to the ﬁeld of child development is enormous. He inspired more research on children’s thinking than any other single theorist. Especially important, Piaget convinced the academic community—as well as many parents and teachers—that children are active contributors to their own development, have their own ways of understanding the world, and must be developmentally ready if teaching is to be successful. 
In the ﬁeld of early childhood education, Piaget’s theory sparked preschool classrooms emphasizing discovery learning through children’s spontaneous interaction with the environment. Rather than teaching didactically, teachers in Piagetian-based settings provide a rich variety of hands-on activities and encourage children’s exploration and experimentation. Educators inspired by Piaget’s work hope that by repeatedly applying cognitive structures in stimulating environments, children will notice and amend deﬁciencies in their thinking. 
In a similar vein, Piaget’s ideas served as a major impetus for the open education movement in elementary education, which rapidly gained ground in the late 1960s and early 1970s. It arose in reaction to the child passivity exacted in traditional classrooms, where pupils sat at their desks, listening to teachers transmit ready-made knowledge, and used textbooks as the main medium of learning.31 A glance inside the door of an open classroom reveals richly equipped learning centers, small groups of pupils working on tasks they choose themselves, and a teacher who moves from one area to another, guiding and supporting in response to children’s individual needs.
Furthermore, children’s progress is evaluated dierently in open education than in traditional education. Rather than tracking how well pupils keep pace with norms, or the average performance of same-age peers, open-classroom teachers evaluate children on an individual basis—in relation to their own prior development. Following Piaget’s lead, this approach accepts the premise that children develop at dierent rates, although it assumes that all follow the same stage sequence. Undoubtedly because open education minimizes the importance of meeting normative standards, open-classroom school-age pupils fall slightly behind their traditional-classroom agemates in achievement test scores. Yet children in open settings display other beneﬁts, including gains in critical thinking, greater respect for individual dierences in their classmates, and more positive attitudes toward school.32
As our discussion already suggests, a central Piagetian tenet is that it is foolhardy to try to speed up development. If children are masters of their own learning, then adult eorts to teach them new skills before they indicate they are interested or ready are doomed to failure. Because Piaget stressed the supremacy of children’s engagement with their surroundings over adult teaching, parents’ and teachers’ contributions to development are severely reduced relative to the child’s. In sum, compared to the behaviorist, adult-supremacy perspective, the Piagetian view stands at the opposite pole.
Despite Piaget’s overwhelming legacy, his theory has been challenged. Recent evidence indicates that Piaget underestimated the capabilities of infants and preschoolers and the direct contribution of adults—both parents and teachers—to cognitive change. To illustrate, let’s look at preschoolers’ responses to Piaget’s conservation problems—the best-known examples of the odd logic of his preoperational stage. Shown two rows of six pennies each, after which the pennies in one row are spread out in a longer line, a 4-year-old is likely to say that the longer row has more pennies. Similarly, after a large ball of play dough is divided into six smaller pieces, a preschooler usually insists that the six pieces have more play dough than the ball, even though none was added during the transformation. Yet a wealth of research reveals that when such tasks are scaled down in diculty (for example, using rows of three or four pennies rather than six or seven) or made relevant to children’s everyday experiences (pretending the play dough is cupcake batter and the six pieces are little cupcakes), preschoolers’ understandings appear closer to those of older children and adults than Piaget assumed.33
Furthermore, in tribal and village cultures without formal schooling, children who are cognitively adept in many ways master Piagetian conservation tasks much later than do children in industrialized nations.34 This suggests that to grasp Piagetian concepts, children must take part in everyday activities, such as transforming the appearance of substances and reasoning about the result, that promote this way of thinking. Older children in preliterate communities who fail Piagetian tasks display other impressive cognitive capacities—ones required by and promoted in their culture. For example, among the Zinacanteco Indians of southern Mexico, girls become expert weavers of complex garments through the informal guidance of adults.35 In Brazil, child street vendors with little or no schooling display sophisticated concepts of classiﬁcation and equivalence as the result of buying candy from wholesalers, pricing it with the help of adults and experienced peers, and bargaining with customers on city streets. Yet when tested for similar understandings on Piagetian problems, these children do poorly.36
Finally, many studies show that children’s performance on tasks such as conservation can be improved with training.37 This, along with the cross-cultural ﬁndings just described, raises doubts about Piaget’s assumption that discovery learning rather than adult teaching is the most eective way to foster development.

absence of a unified vision.  Parents trying to make their way through these opposing theories, and their attendant advice about child-rearing and educational practice, are likely to ﬁnd themselves in a dim forest, without a discernible trail blazed before them. Those who respond with sympathy and patience to their child’s inclinations and demands are as taken to task as those who set clear expectations and relentlessly insist that their child “shape up” and comply with them. 
Parents who throw up their hands in desperation and search through their own parents’ or grandparents’ shelves for a more “tried and true” vision will ﬁnd themselves mired in the same conundrum. They might, for example, run across Arnold Gesell’s books of the 1940s and 1950s—The Infant and Child in the Culture of Today, The First Five Years of Life, and The Child from Five to Ten38—still prominent in many bookstores. Oering a lock-step description of physical, intellectual, and emotional milestones at each age, Gesell aimed to reassure uneasy parents that children’s problematic behaviors were merely a phase—part of a biologically based sequence requiring understanding, not correction. A search of the previous generation’s parenting handbooks might uncover other volumes of this child-centered wave, including In Defense of Children, Children Have Their Reasons, and even Stop Annoying Your Children and Parents, Behave! 
Experts of Gesell’s time complained that he went too far in downplaying the role of parents. His advice was soon overshadowed by Benjamin Spock’s standby, Baby and Child Care, published in 1946 and selling millions of copies over seven editions, the most recent appearing in 1998.39 Providing answers to virtually any question about child rearing that might occur to a parent, from physical care to emotional, disciplinary, and educational issues, Spock seemed, on many fronts, to lean toward parental ﬁrmness and away from children’s rule-of-the-roost. A closer look, however, indicates that even Spock felt torn between the embattled forces of adult and child control. He tried to grant legitimacy to both poles, commenting that perhaps it’s not what you do but how you do it: 

A strictness that comes from harsh feelings or a permissiveness that is timid or vacillating can each lead to poor results. The real issue is what spirit the parent puts into managing the child and what attitude is engendered in the child as a result.40 

Above all, Spock admonished parents to trust themselves, to have the courage of their convictions. Yet many parents “at sea”—in search of a sound child-rearing ideology within the morass of clashing dictates—undoubtedly found Spock’s directive hard to follow.
The past three decades have seen a continuation of this dichotomy of extremes in parenting advice and educational practice. In the 1970s, titles appeared that blew the whistle on permissiveness and child-centeredness, such as Don’t Be Afraid of Your Child and Power to the Parents. As part of this rebound, Thomas Gordon’s Parent Effectiveness Training 41 oered to rescue parents who had allowed their child to ride roughshod over them. In the realm of children’s learning, books in the behaviorist tradition, advocating intensive, early academic training, resurfaced. A prominent example, Siegfried and Therese Engelmann’s blueprint for raising a brighter preschooler, Give Your Child a Superior Mind, appealed to parents bent on boosting their child’s IQ or—even better—producing a genius. In spelling out the theory, the Engelmanns dismissed the legitimacy of biological readiness and proclaimed,

Every single genius at the top end of the IQ scale received early training. Every single one was subjected to an extremely active environment, not one that folded its hands and waited for the child to “mature.”。 The environment has to be empowered with the capacity to transform the “universal baby.”。 A child is the product of what he learns. His intelligence, capacity and range of skills reﬂect his environment—his teachers.42

Educational practice followed suit, moving back toward traditionalism. As Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores of American high school graduates plummeted and concern over the academic preparation of American children and youths became widespread, a “back to basics” movement arose that, by 1980, was in full swing. Academic preschools ﬂourished, and kindergarten and primary classrooms returned to whole-class, teacher-directed instruction relying heavily on workbooks and frequent grading, a style still prevalent today.43 
Bipolar tensions in parenting advice and in educational methods continue to the present day. David Elkind’s book The Hurried Child44 is among the best-known of parenting volumes in the child-centered, Piagetian tradition. Elkind appealed to parents prone to live for and through their child’s accomplishments to give up their vain desire for a superkid, refrain from exaggerating the child’s competence, and stop rushing and pushing the child into adulthood. In keeping with Rousseauian ideals, The Hurried Child advises parents to protect children from the harsh realities of the grown-up world and not to “stress them out” by expecting achievements beyond their biologically based limits. 
As Elkind illustrates, a 10-year-old with many adult responsibilities—such as preparing breakfast, doing housecleaning after school, checking that a younger sibling is all right, assisting with meal preparation, and washing dishes—barely has time for her own personal, homework responsibilities and is in danger of excessive stress from “responsibility overload.”45 Schools, too, Elkind maintains, hurry and stress children by assigning too much tedious work and rushing them from one subject to another, depriving them of time to think and a sense of completion.
Harshly critical of the child-centered tenor of Elkind’s message and pulling in the reverse direction is William Damon’s Greater Expectations,46 an impassioned plea to parents and teachers to eradicate what the author characterizes as a rising, insidious “culture of indulgence” in America’s homes and schools: “Too many children—the auent and the poor alike—are drifting through their childhood years without ﬁnding the skills, virtues or sense of purpose that they will need to sustain a fruitful life.”47
As Damon explains, the child-centered philosophy was a major breakthrough when ﬁrst introduced, in that it made parents and teachers aware that children have unique needs and beneﬁt from warmth and encouragement. But, Damon contends, modern child-centeredness has been stretched to the point of unrestrained child gratiﬁcation, resulting in a youth culture in which children and adolescents are less engaged, less purposeful, less accomplished academically, and more egoistic and antisocial than in previous generations.
Damon acknowledges that economic constraints and other family pressures play a part in this youth disaection. But he places most blame on how contemporary children are reared. Child-centeredness, Damon explains, has become an excuse for a rudderless parenting and educational culture that makes few demands while fostering in children a stress-free, “feel-good” attitude in which children are told, ”You’re lovable,” “You’re great,” “You’re terriﬁc,” regardless of what they do. But because these messages have no basis in meaningful attainment, they are counterproductive. Sooner or later, children see through them, come to mistrust the adults who repeat them, and begin to doubt themselves.
Damon neither endorses the insensitivity of adult dominance nor the tumultuous reign of the child. Instead, he underscores that children are avid, active learners, but adults must cultivate their drive toward mastery. They must induce children to develop talents, skills, good values, and a sense of accomplishment through engagement not just in activities that are easy and fun, but in ones that are meaningful and challenging—that help them sustain eort in the face of diculty, overcome obstacles, and advance to greater heights. 
As Damon’s message suggests, in building an eective vision of child development and child rearing, neither the child’s inner thoughts and feelings nor the role of adult guidance can be singularly extolled or wholeheartedly ignored. To do either leads parents and educators to become trapped in a false opposition, to vacillate, and to think in oversimpliﬁed ways about how best to help children realize their potential to learn and become personally and socially responsible. 

toward a balanced perspective.  The popular parenting literature is notable for lagging substantially behind advances in child-development theory and research. Today, sound theories and educational strategies exist that are neither adult- nor child-centered but, instead, portray both as participating actively, jointly, and inseparably in the process of development. 
On only one point is the popular parenting literature unanimous: the vital importance of getting development o to a good start during the preschool years. The earlier adults begin and the more continuously they engage in eective practices, the more likely children are to sustain eort, achieve in school, develop productive interests, and become responsible, caring individuals. The longer adults postpone and the more unpredictably and inconsistently they behave, the greater the chances that children will develop maladaptive habits and unfruitful interests, doubt their capacities, become dissatisﬁed with themselves, and despair about their prospects for the future. 
After decades of theoretical division and debate, a new, more complex view of child development is coalescing in the ﬁeld, supported by rapidly accumulating research evidence. The fragmented, polarized theories of the past are giving way to more equitable theories emphasizing that the child and the social environment interact and that the contributions of each to development cannot be separated and weighted in a simplistic, one-sided manner.48
Understanding this new view can be immeasurably helpful to parents, caregivers,49 and teachers in providing children with development-enhancing experiences, since it oers a way of thinking about child rearing and education that they can call on to guide decision making in daily life. But a vital prerequisite for enacting this perspective is that parents, especially, must arrange their lives in such a way as to invest time and energy in young children. Indeed, as we will soon see, some children—because of genetic background, biological risk, or previous inept caregiving—require more intensive investment of parental energies than do others. Before we take up this emerging theoretical consensus, let’s address the question of whether greater parental commitment, in the context of today’s demanding and stressful work lives, is possible.


reevaluating the time bind

Parents, as I noted earlier, often complain that they have too little time for children—indeed, too little time to sleep, read, cook, exercise, and socialize as well! Their sense of being overworked and overcommitted, with few moments to spare, must be taken seriously. Feeling constantly frazzled can, in and of itself, interfere with relaxed, patient investment in children.
Yet how pernicious and unique to our lives is this time bind? To gain perspective on this question, I contacted a noted historian of family life,50 who suggested that I consult John Ise’s book, Sod and Stubble, in which Ide chronicles his mother Rosie’s life on a homestead in rural Kansas in the late nineteenth century as she farmed, kept house, and reared eleven children.51
Settling with her husband, Henry, on the land in a one-room cabin, Rosie cooked on a stove so small that she could bake only two loaves of bread at a time, so she had to bake almost every day. She sewed to make the family’s entire wardrobe—her own, her husband’s, and each of her eleven children’s. Keeping up the cabin posed constant diculties. Cracks in the ﬂoor planks and in the log walls permitted various pests to enter, so Rosie battled bedbugs, grasshoppers, and ants, which required frequent searches of the house with a kettle of hot water in one hand and a can of kerosene and a feather in the other. Always, preparations had to be made for the next season—in the fall, for example, cooking enough molasses to last the winter, a task requiring weeks of work.
Outside, Rosie assisted Henry with myriad chores—herding and feeding livestock; making lye from wood ashes to be used in hulling corn for hominy; browning rye for coee; harvesting wheat; and planting and caring for trees, ﬂowers, grapevines, and a vegetable garden. When she was not helping with the crops and the garden, she could be seen washing and hanging out huge baskets of clothes. On rainy days, Rosie grabbed pans from the shelves to catch the water that dripped through the cabin’s sod roof, remaining poised to shift the pans from place to place as new leaks sprang. 
Still, Rosie and her husband Henry had time for their children, as well as time to participate in family gatherings, community events, and learning and literacy societies. While the children were small, they accompanied their parents on outings and during outdoor chores—for example, riding in the rear of the corn-husking wagon, where Rosie and Henry could easily see and talk to them. As they grew older, the children played at adult tasks and soon joined in and helped with many of them. 
Despite grim work lives, Rosie and Henry, who had little schooling themselves, sent nine of their children to college and some to graduate school. They managed to be involved and caring parents, without all the comforts and time-saving conveniences that we now take for granted—a water-tight roof; central heating; fast foods; microwaves; vacuum cleaners; washing machines and dryers; automobiles; telephones; and much, much more.
Though Rosie’s and Henry’s way of life was hard, and we shouldn’t go too far in romanticizing it, their story helps us put the contemporary time bind in perspective. It suggests that many parents who feel overwhelmed by life’s demands ought to be able to free up more time for their children—the ﬁrst step toward high-quality child rearing. Recent research by time-allocation experts John Robinson and Georey Godbey substantiates this conclusion. Although Americans perceive their work hours as excessive, squeezing out other aspects of their lives, a dierent picture emerges when they keep detailed diaries of how they spend their time. Every 10 years since 1965, Robinson and Godbey have gathered daily time diaries from thousands of respondents, representing a cross-section of the American population. They discovered that not only are people’s gross estimates of time per week devoted to work 6 to 8 hours higher than those recorded in their diaries, but free time—time unencumbered by any obligations—has actually increased! 
Americans are working less than they did in 1965—about 6 fewer hours per week for men, 5 fewer for women.52 Diary-obtained estimates of free time average 36 hours per week for employed men, 34 for employed women. Robinson and Godbey note that compared to a generation ago, the free time of Americans is more plentiful but also more disjointed—a half hour here, an hour there. How do they spend it? Americans report that TV viewing consumes nearly 40 percent—about 15 hours—of their unallocated moments. It seems easier to watch the news or an episode of a favorite TV show than to go to a concert, enjoy a leisurely family dinner, or take the children to a museum or the zoo.
Time-diary ﬁndings also verify that time constraints are greater for higher-income Americans. Yet the income gap in free time is not large; ﬁnancially well-o individuals average only 2 to 4 hours a week less free time than do their less economically advantaged counterparts. Weekly free time for privileged Americans with demanding careers is still plentiful. 
If free time is so abundant, why do so many parents say their lives are pressure cookers? The reason, Robinson and Godbey suggest, is that our pace of life is faster. People expect to do more, to live more intensely. Hence, they try to speed up the yield of time, often by doing several things at once—in the case of Angela and Tom, attending to work tasks while ﬁxing dinner, watching TV, and ﬁelding Victor and Jeannine’s urgent pleas for attention. The very activity of squeezing more into the moment exacerbates the belief that time is scarce. This “time-famine” sensation is the wellspring of parental eorts to create quality time in the absence of quantity—a contradiction in terms. 
How can parents beat the “time bind”? Rather than merely cultivating time-saving skills—a remedy that, by itself, may even further compress time spent with children—Robinson and Godbey recommend that parents ﬁnd ways to meld time-saving with time-savoring. When parents have full-time jobs, some time pressure is bound to be present—in getting shopping, laundry, and cleaning done; meals on the table; and children to and from child care, school, and various activities. Yet to grant children adequate attention and involvement, there is no substitute for slowing down and reexamining the pace of everyday life. Parents must ask questions like these: 

•Does my family have a sit-down meal together on most days of the week, free from the distractions of a blaring TV and a constantly ringing telephone? 
•Do I have time on most days to interact one-on-one with each of my children? 
•Do I involve my children positively and usefully in play and recreation and in accomplishing tasks of daily living—shopping, cleaning, gardening, cooking, decorating, and repairing? 
•Do I provide my children with predictable routines; clear, consistently enforced rules; and sucient oversight, while they are both within and beyond my immediate supervision—practices that help ensure that the time I share with them is plentiful, pleasurable, and constructively spent?
Clearly, true quality time for children is quantity time and more! Fashioning time for parents and children to be together is the ﬁrst step toward implementing the ideas and practices I’ll discuss in this book. A second step is an appreciation of the multiplicity of factors that contribute to development—an understanding that spells out parents’ vital role yet clariﬁes how it joins with other forces to aect children’s development and well-being. 


child development: a new consensus

At the dawn of a new millennium, a fresh set of theories of child development has blossomed. The new approaches are numerous—some more concerned with motor skills, others with cognitive competencies, and still others with emotional and social development. Yet they form a consensus, a set of variations on a uniﬁed theme.53 Each borrows features from past perspectives that have withstood the test of time and integrates them with current evidence. The result is a new outlook on how children acquire more complex and eective skills. 

Many Factors Contribute to Development

The new view assumes that many elements, internal and external to the child, work together as a dynamic, synergistic system to aect children’s thinking, feeling, and acting. These elements include the child’s heredity and biological constitution; the people and objects in the child’s everyday settings of home, child-care center, school, and neighborhood; community resources for child rearing (such as family-friendly workplace policies and high-quality, aordable child care); and cultural values and customs related to child development and education.54
Look closely at these ideas—that children are aected by interwoven factors in biology, everyday contexts, and culture—and you will see that contemporary researchers are no longer one-sided in how they view the power of the child versus the adult, or heredity versus environment. Most have turned away from asking which inﬂuence is more important to uncovering how nature and nurture work together to aect the child’s traits and capacities.
In addition, researchers now realize that quite normal children show both similarities and dierences in pathways of change. A common human genetic heritage and basic regularities in children’s physical and social environments yield certain universal, broad outlines of development. At the same time, biological makeup, everyday tasks, and the people who support children in mastery of those tasks vary greatly, resulting in wide individual dierences in speciﬁc skills.55 And because children build competencies by engaging in real activities in real contexts, dierent skills vary in maturity within the same child! Recall the Zinacanteco Indian child weavers and the Brazilian child street vendors, who are advanced in skills relevant to their own culture yet behind on tasks devised for children in Western industrialized nations. They oer a dramatic illustration of developmental variation—both between children and within the same child. 

Heredity and Environment as Inseparable 

Within this dynamic system in which inner and outer forces jointly engender development, each contributing factor inﬂuences—and is inﬂuenced by—the others. Therefore, the roles of heredity and environment, of the child and important people in his or her life, so closely interconnect that according to some experts, their inﬂuence is inseparable.56 To illustrate, let’s take two vibrant, contemporary research topics relevant to young children’s learning: (1) the dramatic growth of the brain during the ﬁrst 6 years, and (2) young children’s temperaments, or genetically inﬂuenced styles of relating to their physical and social worlds. 

brain development. Many people think of infancy and early childhood as a time when the human brain is especially sensitive to experience. In line with this view, although genes provide the code for basic brain structures and functions, heredity goes only so far in aecting the organization of the child’s brain and the rate at which it develops. The environment has a crucial, profound impact.
How does early experience join with biology to aect brain development? The cerebral cortex, seat of human intelligence, undergoes dramatic growth during the ﬁrst few years. Almost all its neurons—cells that store and transmit information—are in place by the second trimester of pregnancy. Once established, neurons begin to take on unique functions by sending out branching ﬁbers, which form elaborate connections with other neurons. Formation of this complex communication system contributes to an enormous increase in size of the brain—from nearly 30 percent of its adult weight at birth to 70 percent by age 2 and 90 percent by age 6.57
As neurons form connections, a new factor becomes vital in their survival: stimulation. Neurons stimulated by the surrounding environment continue to establish new connections, which support more complex functions. Neurons seldom stimulated soon lose their connections as their ﬁbers atrophy. Notice how, for the biological side of brain development to go forward, appropriate stimulation is essential while formation of neural connections is at its peak.58
During early childhood, the brain is highly plastic, or adaptable, in that many brain regions are not yet committed to speciﬁc functions. This means that if a part of the brain is damaged, other parts can usually take over the tasks that would have been handled by the damaged region, provided they are granted the necessary stimulation. In a study of preschool children with a wide variety of brain injuries sustained in the ﬁrst year of life, psychologist Joan Stiles found that cognitive deﬁcits were milder than those observed in brain-injured adults. And by age 5, virtually all impairments had disappeared! As the children gained perceptual, cognitive, and motor experiences, stimulated intact areas of the cerebral cortex compensated for the early damage.59 By age 8 to 10, most brain regions have taken on speciﬁc functions, so brain plasticity declines. Because of rapid brain growth and gradual decline in brain plasticity, the ﬁrst 5 to 8 years of life are regarded as a sensitive phase of development in which appropriate stimulation is necessary for children to reach their full genetic potential.
In describing the close connection between brain growth and experience, I have used the expression “appropriate stimulation.” By this, I mean neither impoverished conditions nor excessive bombardment with sights and sounds but input that the child can absorb, as indicated by his or her approach, interest, and concentration. In Burton White and Robert Held’s classic study of the impact of early stimulation on development, young babies in a barren institution given a moderate amount of stimulation tailored to their ability to handle it—at ﬁrst, a few simple designs on the side of their crib and later, a fancy mobile—reached for and explored objects six weeks earlier than did infants given nothing to look at. A third group of babies given massive stimulation—patterned crib bumpers and fancy mobiles beginning in the ﬁrst few weeks of life—also reached for objects sooner than did unstimulated babies. But this heavy dose of enrichment took its toll. The massively enriched infants looked away and cried a great deal, and they were not as advanced in reaching and exploring as the moderately stimulated babies.60
Much research conﬁrms that overloading children with input leads to disorganization of behavior. Excessive stimulation also causes them to withdraw as they try to shield themselves from a stimulus deluge, thereby creating conditions that, paradoxically, are much like stimulus deprivation!61 These ﬁndings help us understand, from a brain-development perspective, the detrimental impact of excessive adult tutoring on young children, described earlier in this chapter. They also raise grave concerns about the recent proliferation of expensive commercial early learning centers, in which infants are barraged with letter and number ﬂashcards and slightly older toddlers are drenched in a full curriculum of reading, math, science, art, music, gym, and more.62 Rather than optimizing early neurological growth (as proponents claim), these eorts to jump-start young children can inﬂict considerable harm, robbing them of a healthy start on the road to maturity.63
Our rapidly expanding knowledge base on brain development and children’s learning reveals that a genetically inﬂuenced roadmap for brain growth and a developmentally appropriate environment go hand in hand; the impact of each depends on the other. Appropriate stimulation “wires” the brain, prompting it to form new connections and its regions to specialize. As this process goes forward, the brain gradually becomes receptive to increasingly complex and varied stimulation. This fosters further elaboration and specialization of brain structures and ever more advanced knowledge and skills. 

temperament.  From the earliest ages, children vary greatly in preferences, interests, talents—and in temperament, or style of emotional responding, the most thoroughly studied of these sources of individual variation. Temperament encompasses activity level, ability to attend to stimuli, and capacity to adjust the intensity of emotions to a comfortable level so the child can remain adaptively engaged with his or her physical and social surroundings.64 
Temperamental dierences among infants and children are of great interest to researchers because temperament is believed to form the cornerstone of the adult personality. A wealth of research reveals that for children to develop at their best, the experiences adults provide must be adapted not just to children’s general neurological progress, but also to their unique temperamental needs. 
Temperamental traits most often studied include attention span, fear of novel experiences, irritability when desires are frustrated, and quality of mood (positive versus negative).65 Parents can rate their children’s temperamental qualities fairly accurately; their judgments show a reasonable correspondence with researchers’ observations of children’s behavior.66 Teacher ratings are even more precise, since teachers are familiar with many children and therefore have a broader basis for judging whether a particular child is high, low, or intermediate on dimensions of temperament. 
Let’s see how temperament combines with brain development and experience, forming a complex, dynamic system that shapes the course of development. Take Larry, who when brought as an infant to a highly stimulating laboratory playroom, was agitated and upset by all the new sights, sounds, and people. Yet baby Mitch, when introduced to the very same playroom, watched with interest, laughed, and eagerly approached the exciting toys and strangers. Larry scores high on the temperamental dimension of fearful distress. On observing him, most of us would call him a very shy, inhibited child. Mitch, in contrast, scores low on fearful distress and high on positive mood. He is, in everyday language, an uninhibited, sociable child.
To chart the development of shy and sociable children, psychologist Jerome Kagan followed several hundred youngsters from infancy into the school years, repeatedly observing their behavior and measuring their physiological responses to highly stimulating, unfamiliar events. As babies, about 20 percent were easily upset (like Larry), whereas 40 percent were comfortable, even delighted, at new experiences (like Mitch).67 
According to Kagan, individual dierences in arousal of an inner brain structure called the amygdala, which controls avoidance reactions, underlie these contrasting temperamental styles. In shy, inhibited children, novel stimuli easily excite the amygdala and its connections to the cerebral cortex and sympathetic nervous system (which prepares the body to act in the face of threat). The same level of stimulation evokes minimal neural excitation in highly sociable, uninhibited children. Indeed, shy children’s physiological responses to novelty—a rise in heart rate, pupil dilation, blood pressure, and blood concentration of cortisol (a hormone that combats stress)—resemble the reactions of very timid animals and are known to be mediated by the amygdala.68 When neural messages from the amygdala reach the cortex, they lead a shy child to interpret new experiences negatively and a sociable child to interpret them positively. Indeed, brain waves in the cortex dier strikingly for these two types of children.69
Are these early, biologically based temperamental styles destined to last, restricting learning opportunities for shy children while opening new doors for their sociable counterparts? The answer, once again, depends on experience—especially, parenting practices. When parents shield infants and preschoolers who dislike novelty from minor stresses—such as eating and sleeping in a new setting or meeting new people—they make it harder for the child to overcome the urge to retreat from unfamiliar events. Under these conditions, heredity and environment act in concert to maintain the child’s fear, increasing the likelihood that it will translate into long-term adjustment diculties, such as excessive cautiousness, social withdrawal, loneliness, and (by school age) overwhelming anxiety in the face of academic challenges.
This does not mean that a shy child should be forced into new situations with coldness, harshness, and impatience—tactics that magnify their dread of new and unpredictable events. Instead, parents who warmly, but consistently and assertively, require their inhibited child to try new experiences and guide and support them in doing so actually reduce the child’s physiological stress reactions, fostering a more adaptive style in the child. Indeed, adult eorts of this kind are believed to be largely responsible for the fact that about 70 percent of extremely inhibited babies cope with novelty more eectively as they get older (although practically none become highly sociable).
Shy and sociable children also require dierent adult interventions to promote exploration of their surroundings—an activity that (as Piaget pointed out) is essential for optimal cognitive development. Vivacious, stimulating parental behavior, including frequent questioning, instructing, and pointing out objects, is beneﬁcial for reserved, inactive infants; it helps them become interested in and engaged with novel toys. Yet these same parental behaviors interfere with exploration in very active, outgoing children.70 For these youngsters, too much adult intervention is intrusive; it dampens their natural curiosity. Consequently, “appropriate stimulation” varies for these two types of children.
Finally, culture aects the likelihood that parents and teachers will respond to shy children in ways that foster their development. In Western nations, shyness is regarded as a form of social maladjustment—a perspective that heightens the chances that adults and peers will react negatively to inhibited children’s reticence and retreat. In China, adults evaluate shy children positively, as advanced in social maturity and understanding! The high value placed on self-restraint in Chinese culture leads shy children to receive very positive feedback from adults and peers. Consequently, inhibited Chinese youngsters appear particularly well adjusted during the school years—well liked by their classmates and rated by their teachers as academically and socially skilled.71

The Roles of Parents and Other Adults: Agents of Change, Buffers, Gatekeepers, and Conveyors of Culture 

Environmental forces, from adult–child interaction to cultural values, join with heredity to aect the development of children with other temperamental dispositions as well. Throughout this book—and especially in Chapter 5, which addresses the development of children with physical and mental disabilities—we will see many more examples of these synergistic eects. In each, the role of parents and teachers as agents of change is vigorous and profound, although not sovereign and exclusive. Parents cannot erase their child’s genetic propensities, but they can alter many of them in a favorable direction, especially if they have access to knowledge about eective child rearing and they intervene in early childhood, the years of greatest neurological malleability. 
Furthermore, when parents and other adults apply good rearing practices, they serve as buers, or sources of protection, for children against threatening forces in the wider world. A common thread in research on the impact of stressful life events and conditions (including poverty, divorce, abuse, community violence, and wartime trauma) is that a close relationship with a parent, relative, or teacher who introduces aection, assistance, and order into the child’s life, fosters resiliency—mastery of cognitive and social skills that enable the child to withstand and even overcome adversity. To be sure, children who are relaxed, socially responsive, and able to deal with change are more likely to elicit the support of parents and other adults. At the same time, children can develop more attractive dispositions and adaptive skills as the result of parental warmth, attention, and consistent guidance.72
Parents and teachers also act as gatekeepers for young children. Depending on the experiences they oer, they open up or close o a great many avenues for learning. These include toys, books, television, computers, special lessons, weekend outings, time with grandparents and other extended family members, as well as the quality of child care, schooling, and the neighborhood they choose to live in (depending, of course, on the extent to which communities oer viable choices). 
In all the ways just mentioned, parents and other adults are vital conveyers of culture, through direct teaching of attitudes and values and through the pervasive imprint of culture on the settings and activities they provide for children. In the hands of parents and teachers lies the awesome responsibility of conveying to the next generation the intellectual, scientiﬁc, aesthetic, and moral achievements that dierentiate our species from others. From the simplest preliterate society to the most technologically advanced nation, adults are charged with ensuring that children acquire competencies that enable them to assume a responsible place in their society and, ultimately, participate in transmitting its values and practices to future generations. 
Of course, children have an important say in the socialization process. For example, they usually become more expert at those skills that complement their native talents. And depending on their dispositions, the road to maturity may be rockier, requiring greater investment of parental energies and distinct child-rearing strategies. Moreover, without a doubt, peers contribute greatly to socialization—especially by helping children learn to resolve conﬂict, cooperate, share, form deep attachments beyond the family, and otherwise behave in ways that foster social harmony. But the recent, widely publicized claim of Judith Rich Harris, in her book entitled The Nurture Assumption73—that parents are minor players who are overshadowed by children’s genetic makeup and peer culture—is not correct. 
Indeed, many eminent child development researchers have countered Harris’s thesis. 74 Genes and peers do not supplant adult agents, including parents, grandparents, aunts, uncles, family friends, and teachers. Harris draws on evidence suggesting that children’s inherited intellectual and personality attributes lead them to evoke particular responses from adults, which further strengthen the child’s inherited traits. For example, a friendly baby receives more social stimulation than a quiet, passive infant; a cooperative, attentive preschooler receives more patient and sensitive interaction than does an inattentive, distractible child; and a bright, advanced child is praised and stimulated more than a child developing more slowly. Hence, Harris concludes, most children follow a genetically preordained developmental course, regardless of parental inﬂuence.
Although Harris is correct that children often evoke behaviors from parents and others that strengthen their genetic tendencies, research clearly shows that parents can, and often do, uncouple these child-to-parent eects. Indeed, the substantial malleability of temperament in infancy and early childhood is explained, in large measure, by the fact that many parents and other adults are successful in guiding children with maladaptive tendencies toward more eective functioning. Moreover, decades of research on intelligence show that IQ, although not inﬁnitely pliant, varies greatly with the stimulating quality of children’s experiences.75
Furthermore, no conclusive evidence exists for the assertion that the most consequential environment for children’s development is the peer group rather than the family. It is based on an array of selective and equivocal ﬁndings, mustered to convince readers that parenting eects are conﬁned to how children behave in parents’ presence and do not extend beyond the home. I will show repeatedly in this book that just the opposite is so—that parenting practices have much to do with children’s competence at language and communication; sensitivity to others’ feelings and needs; capacity to get along with others within and beyond the family; achievement in school; and guiding values, beliefs, and attitudes.
In fact, this overriding emphasis on peers as a source of positive development is itself a product of our culture. Compared to other nations, the United States is more peer-oriented; it places greater value on gregariousness and being liked by agemates.76 As more American parents with busy, stressed lives retreat from their children, peers take over. Without a constructive link between the values taught at home and the values of the peer group, the consequences of high peer orientation are decidedly negative—a rise in school failure, aimlessness, drug use, teen pregnancy, antisocial behavior, and other youth problems of current concern in the United States.
Downplaying the role of parents—suggesting that they are relatively unimportant in socialization—does both families and society a disservice. It leads parents, like Noah and Suzanne, who are on the cusp of a dramatic period of development in their 2-year-old son’s life, to express grave doubts about their own importance. Harvard University psychologist Howard Gardner notes:

Children would not—could not—grow up to be members of a civilized culture if they were simply left to the examples of their peer。 . A social science—or a layman’s guide—that largely left out parents after birth would be absurd. So would a society.
Whether on the scene, or behind the scenes, parents have jointly created the institutions that train and inspire children: apprenticeships, schools, works of art and literature, religious classes, playing ﬁelds, and even forms of resistance and rebellion. These institutions, and the adults who run them, sustain civilization and provide the disciplines—however fragile they may seem—that keep our societies from reverting to barbarism.77


sociocultural theory: dialogues with children 

This book takes its inspiration from sociocultural theory, one of the dynamic, synergistic perspectives that has recently captivated the ﬁeld. The central idea of sociocultural theory is that the child and his or her social surroundings join to provide direction to development; participation in social life guides and energizes the child’s mastery of new, culturally adaptive skills. Because sociocultural theory focuses on children’s access to and interaction with cultural experts, it has much to say to parents and teachers about how they can help children develop into responsible, contributing members of society. 
Sociocultural theory originated with Russian psychologist Lev Vygotsky, who carried out his highly innovative research during the 1920s and early 1930s, writing proliﬁcally on the contribution of social experience to children’s learning. After the Soviet Union’s twenty-year ban on Vygotsky’s writings was lifted in the mid-1950s, his major works reached the West. They began to be translated into English in the 1960s and 1970s.78 By the 1980s, many American psychologists and educators—doubting the Piagetian view of development and desiring to account for wide variation in children’s competencies—embraced Vygotsky’s ideas with enthusiasm.79
According to sociocultural theory, cooperative dialogues between children and more knowledgeable members of their society are necessary for children to acquire the ways of thinking and behaving that make up a community’s culture. These dialogues occur frequently and spontaneously as adults and children spend time together—in everyday situations such as household chores, mealtimes, play, storybook reading, outings in the community, and children’s eorts to acquire all sorts of skills. Although interactions that arise between adults and children may seem mundane and inconsequential at ﬁrst glance, sociocultural theory emphasizes that they are powerful sources of children’s learning.
Consider the following conversation between Mel and his 4-year-old son, Ben, as the pair took a summer-evening walk on a California beach near their home. Mel had brought along a plastic bag, as the beach was often littered with trash after a busy day.

Ben: (running ahead and calling out) Some bottles and cans. I’ll get them. 
Mel: If the bottles are broken, you could cut yourself, so let me get them. (Catches up and holds out the bag as Ben drops items in)
Ben: Dad, look at this shell. It’s a whole one, really big. Colors all inside! 
Mel: Hmmm, might be an abalone shell.
Ben: What’s abalone?
Mel: Do you remember what I had in my sandwich on the wharf yesterday? That’s abalone.
Ben: You eat it?
Mel: Well, you can. You eat a meaty part that the abalone uses to stick to rocks. 
Ben: Ewww. I don’t want to eat it. Can I keep the shell?
Mel: I think so. Maybe you can ﬁnd some things in your room to put in it. (Points to the shell’s colors) Sometimes people make jewelry out of these shells. 
Ben: Like mom’s necklace?
Mel: That’s right. Mom’s necklace is made out of a kind of abalone with a very colorful shell—pinks, purples, blues. It’s called Paua. When you turn it, the colors change.
Ben: Wow! Let’s look for Paua shells!
Mel: You can’t ﬁnd them here, only in New Zealand.
Ben: Where’s that? Have you been there?
Mel: No, someone brought Mom the necklace as a gift. But I’ll show you New Zealand on the globe. It’s far away, halfway around the world.
In this dialogue, which lasted only a few minutes, Mel conveyed important social values and a wealth of information to Ben—about responsibility for preserving the environment, about safety precautions, about the wonders of an unusual sea creature, about the beauty and utility of natural objects, and even about world geography.
According to sociocultural theory, as adults—and more expert peers as well—help children participate in culturally meaningful activities, the communication between them becomes part of children’s thinking. Once children internalize essential features of these dialogues, they use the language within them to accomplish new skills and to gain control over their own thought and behavior.80 The young child speaking to herself when tempted by a forbidden object (“Don’t touch!”), solving a dicult puzzle (“Where does this piece go?”), ﬁnding an interesting shell on the beach (“Looks like Mom’s shiny necklace.” ), or acting out a scene in make-believe play (“What would you like for lunch? An abalone sandwich?”) has started to produce the same kind of guiding comments that an adult previously used to help the child think about the world and engage in important tasks. 

A Socially Formed Mind

Sociocultural theory is unique in viewing inner mental activity as profoundly social. The thoughts and imaginings that make us distinctly human are not regarded as independently constructed by the child. Rather, the child derives them from his or her history of relations with other people. 
According to Vygotsky, infants are biologically endowed with basic perceptual, attentional, and memory capacities that they share with other animals. These undergo a natural course of development through direct contact with the environment during the ﬁrst two years of life, similar to the process of exploration and discovery described by Piaget. For example, all babies gradually distinguish objects and people in their surroundings and realize that these entities continue to exist when out of sight. They also merge objects that are alike into categories (such as vehicles, animals, birds, and eating utensils), laying the foundation for mentally representing their experiences and thinking eciently. And they become adept at imitating others, a powerful means for acquiring new skills. These and other infant capabilities set the stage for language, which develops with extraordinary speed after 1 year of age. By ages 2 to 3, most children are skilled conversationalists; by age 6, they have mastered most of the grammatical rules of their language and have vocabularies as large as ten thousand words.81 
The milestones just cited are broad universals of development. They characterize children everywhere, as long as they are biologically prepared to learn and live in stimulating physical and social surroundings. But once children become capable of representing objects and events with symbols, especially language, their ability to participate in dialogues is greatly enhanced. This leads to a crucial change in development. The natural line of development makes closer contact with its surrounding social context, merges with it, and is transformed by it.82 Children’s social exchanges begin to inﬂuence their ways of thinking more profoundly than before, permitting them to acquire competencies in keeping with the requirements of their families and communities.
A basic premise of sociocultural theory is that all uniquely human, higher forms of thinking—including controlled attention to tasks, memory strategies, reﬂections on experiences and ideas, techniques for solving problems, and imagination—are deeply aected by children’s social experiences. For example, when a parent suggests to a young ball player, “Watch me, keep your eyes on the ball!” the adult helps the child control attention, essential for mastering any complex task. When a teacher says, “Let’s write the names of our snack helpers on the board,” or “Put all the animals together and all the vehicles together,” she teaches vital strategies for remembering. And a parent or teacher who asks, “Is Brenda crying because you took her colored pencils? What can you do to become friends again?” encourages children to reﬂect on their experiences and to think of eective techniques for solving social problems.
Vygotsky emphasized that to understand children’s development, it is necessary to understand the social situations adults devise for them. Any higher form of thinking, he pointed out, ﬁrst appears in social communication, between the child and representatives of his or her culture as they engage in a joint activity. Only later does it appear within the child, as an individual capacity or skill.83 The child’s mind, then, is a profoundly social organ. Through social life, it makes contact with and is inﬂuenced by other, more expert minds, permitting transfer of the values, knowledge, and skills essential for success in a particular culture.

The Importance of Language

Because Vygotsky regarded language as the major bridge between our social and mental worlds, he viewed language acquisition as the most signiﬁcant milestone in children’s cognitive development. Language is our primary avenue of communication with others and means through which we represent our experiences. Once children start to think with words, language becomes an indispensable “tool of the mind.” Just as a hammer is a tool used to gain control over and transform physical objects, so we call on language to inﬂuence the thought and behavior of other people and ourselves.84 
Language not only conveys culturally meaningful ideas but is itself deeply imbued with culture. It—along with other symbolic tools, such as gestures, aids to memory, systems for counting, works of art, diagrams, and maps—is the product of the social history of a cultural group, the result of members’ eorts to create a communal way of life. Indeed, the central purpose of language, from its moment of emergence, is “communication, social contact, inﬂuencing surrounding individuals.”85 Then it becomes an individually applied tool for governing our own thoughts and actions.
To illustrate how Vygotsky envisioned this close connection between social interaction and children’s thinking and behaving, let’s look in on another verbal exchange between a parent and a young child. Deb is pulling weeds in the garden while 2 1/2-year-old Maggy follows along, alternately digging with her small spade and holding a toy telephone to her ear. Soon gray clouds appear along the horizon, and thunder can be heard. Maggy, frightened by the booming sounds, whimpers to Deb, “Scary, Mommy. Go inside!”
“That thunder is way up in the sky, far away,” Deb explains, pointing o in the distance. “It can’t hurt you. We need to get these weeds out before the rain comes. Just a little longer, and then we’ll go inside.”
Maggy listens and responds, “Not scary, far far away,” and Deb nods in agreement. As Maggy waits, she paces back and forth near Deb, speaking into her toy phone, “Not scary thunder. Far away. Get the weeds. Not scary, boom boom! Like a big drum.” 
Maggy has taken the communication jointly generated with her mother and turned it toward herself. She uses speech derived from that conversation to reﬂect on the thunder, allay her fear, and help her wait until Deb’s task is ﬁnished and they can go inside. As Maggy “thinks aloud” with words, she converses with herself, in much the same way that she interacted with her mother. Over time, Maggy will start to interact with herself silently, “inside her head.” And as Maggie’s social experiences expand and become more complex, she will continue to weave aspects of them into her inner dialogues, acquiring new, more advanced ways of thinking.
A ﬁnal point about thinking as internalized social interaction: Note that Maggy’s telephone conversation with herself is not a simple copy of Deb’s remarks to her. The sociocultural vision is very dierent from behaviorism, which views development as directly imposed, or shaped, by external forces. Instead, children are active agents, contributing to the creation of their own thought processes by collaborating with more experienced cultural members in meaningful activities. The combination of child and adult leads to the communication between them. Then children actively take over this interaction and gradually adapt it for ecient and eective self-communication, shortening and personalizing it. 
To capture this idea of children selecting from social interaction in ways that ﬁt their goals, some experts like to say that the child “appropriates”—or adopts—tools of the mind.86 Others continue to describe the child as “internalizing” social experience but emphasize the child’s unique contribution to both adult–child interaction and its internalization. Whatever label is applied, active engagement on the part of both adult and child, resulting in a “meeting of minds,” is central to this process.

Purposeful Activities and Culturally Adaptive Competencies

Children learn and practice thinking by participating in purposeful activities, organized by their cultural community. This ensures that they will acquire competencies that are adaptive in their culture. 
At very young ages, when children are just beginning to acquire culturally valued skills, they depend almost entirely on interactions with more expert cultural members to make sense of their experiences. For example, when researchers tested 3-year-olds to ﬁnd out what they remembered about a visit to a museum, the children recalled only information they had talked about with their mothers; everything else had been forgotten.87 
When young children do not understand a concept or how to solve a problem, most often they lack experience in relevant activities with more expert individuals. For example, some ethnic minority children, who grow up in more “people-oriented” than “object-oriented” homes, do less well than they otherwise would on academic tasks because they rarely participate in activities involving “educational” toys, games, and a question–answer style of adult–child interaction (“What color is that?” How many wheels on that truck?”), which prime children for academic success.88 Yet these very same children who do poorly in the classroom can be seen telling complex stories, engaging in elaborate artistic activities, competently watching over younger children, and accomplishing athletic feats in daily life.
The importance of activity contexts reminds us that all children do not face identical tasks. Cultures, and adults within them responsible for socialization, select dierent tasks for children’s learning. As a result, children’s cognition is contextualized; it emerges and derives meaning from particular activities and social experiences. Parents who spend little time in joint pursuits and conversation with their children convey to them a very dierent set of cultural values, practices, and cognitive strategies than do parents who involve their children in constructive play and projects; encourage them to participate in family routines and duties, such as meal preparation and cleaning; and plan parent–child outings. Similarly, teachers who require mostly solitary desk work from children, isolating the skills taught from their everyday use, promote values and competencies strikingly dierent from those cultivated by teachers who embed teaching and learning in meaningful collaborative activities.
The core lesson to be learned from our discussion so far is that development is a matter of children’s genetic/biological potential undergoing a cultural metamorphosis, a process that cannot take place without parents and teachers as thoughtful and committed participants in children’s lives. From the sociocultural perspective, parents and teachers are leaders in awakening children’s minds and fostering their development; children are apprenticed to these experts. 
Hence, to Talia’s concern, posed at the start of our discussion: Should she and her husband, Jim, respond to 7-year-old Anselmo’s pleas for help with his homework? Given what we currently know about how children develop, the answer is a resounding yes. Rather than promoting dependency (as Talia and her husband fear), assisting Anselmo is the surest route to competent functioning, provided parental interaction builds on Anselmo’s current capacities and remains sensitive to his unique characteristics. Now let’s turn to just how parents and teachers can advance children’s knowledge and skills.




In the Western experience with evil, we choose repeatedly to put our faith in law and the legal culture to redeem ourselves from sin. Over and over again, we find states indulging in total war, terror, genocide, and the mass killing of their own people, and then turning to the legal culture in the hope that they can atone for the iniquity and live once again as a civilized nation. This view—that the law shall make us clean—should give us pause. Faith in the law has not been an unqualified virtue in the Christian West. One might expect individuals influenced by Jesus’s Sermon on the Mount to turn first to love and charity as the means of atonement. But nations—organized, organic societies—must take a different path. A nation must proceed collectively to find redemption.
I write in this chapter of religious ideas and their value in understanding our legal experience. This, admittedly, is an unusual take in our rigorously secular academic world. The American university world has distanced itself from the sensibilities of ordinary Americans who take the Bible seriously as a source of wisdom and who live their lives with devotion to values of faith and redemption. In this interpretation of law as the path to national redemption, I seek to find a middle way between Jewish and Christian thinking. There is no doubt that the nations whose struggles I describe—France, Germany, and the United States—think of themselves as Christian nations. Yet, the very idea of redemption of the entire nation through law resonates more with the older tradition of the Jewish national mission under the Torah revealed at Mount Sinai. My account seeks to unite the divergent strains of all religions that trace their roots to the original idea in Exodus of a nation living under God and under law.
To understand the phenomenon of communal redemption, we must turn to the Bible as our source. The model of the Hebrews’ deliverance from servitude and their ensuing acceptance of God’s law at Mount Sinai have repeatedly appealed to dominant powers of the West and often to opposite sides of the same conflict. In the rhetoric of the abolitionists, slavery in the United States made the country into “a House of Bondage.” Both blacks and whites identified with the same story of liberation from this domain of oppression. Nat Turner thought he was recreating the biblical story when he led a slave revolt in 1831. The slaves whom Harriet Tubman led to freedom in the North called her Moses. Abraham Lincoln readily saw himself in the image of Moses leading his people out of bondage into the realm of freedom.
The Hebrews fled Egypt in order, eventually, to accept the law revealed at Mount Sinai: delivery from servitude requires more than violent revolt. The message of Exodus is not simply liberation from slavery but the domesticating of violent sensibilities under the rule of law. Jews celebrate this submission to God’s law in the holiday of Shevuot, which commemorates the revelation of the Torah at Mount Sinai and is celebrated fifty days after the night of the Exodus. Christians have reinterpreted this event as the descent of the Holy Spirit, celebrated in the analogous spring holiday of Pentecost.
The idea that freedom exists only under law is often understood as a Central European or German approach to the individual in society. Americans tend to subscribe rather to the myth of a Lockian state of nature, where individuals exist prior to the organization of society under a social contract. The Declaration of Independence relies heavily on the principle that the “consent of the governed” is indispensable to the legitimacy of government. Yet, in actual American practice, the law—particularly constitutional law—serves the same function of sanctifying the social order as it does in the European experience. Before turning to the details of the American appeal to law after the surrender at Appomattox Courthouse in April 1865, let us examine first two significant European efforts to domesticate tendencies toward violence under the rule of law.


Redemption by Law in 
France and Germany

Think first about the way in which the French sought repose from post-revolutionary terror in their Code civil. The country passed through fifteen years of regicide, terror, and mass executions. Amidst voices clamoring for stability and security, Napoleon staged his coup d’état in late 1799. High on his agenda was revamping the legal system. In 1804, he charged a group of lawyers with the task of drafting a new civil code in language accessible to ordinary people. The committee produced the elegant Code civil, now a mainstay of French culture and a model for civil codification all over the world. The language is so refined that the novelist Henri Stendhal reportedly reviewed the style of ten code provisions every night before retiring. Today, when the Francophones in Quebec preach the distinctiveness of their culture, they never fail to mention their Code civil, modeled after Napoleon’s effort to use the law as the means of restoring civilized order to France.
The Code civil has proved to be remarkably durable in French culture. Constitutions have come and gone and the French have endured recurrent changes of regime, including communes, dictatorships, and five distinct republics. Yet, through all this, the civil code has survived. It is the cultural monument that unites the French across history.
In its substantive content, the Code civil is strongly identified with the achievements of the 1789 Revolution against the ancien regime. The code sweeps away the vestiges of feudal influence in the law of property and in the law of evidence and proclaims a liberal legal order. The end of feudalism in the law of property meant that a single concept of ownership would replace the ancient system of embedded estates. The implication was that all land would be freely alienable, without being burdened by the residual control of lords higher in the feudal chain. The code thus provides the legal foundation for a market economy. The end of feudalism in the field of evidence means that the testimony of a nobleman is no longer worth more than the oath of a peasant. Thus the code institutionalizes the égalité of all citizens, as promised in the slogan of the Revolution.
Standing for these liberal values, incorporating the messages of revolution, and surviving all changes of political regimes, the Code civil functions like a constitution for the French. It is the bedrock of the legal culture. In their code, the French have found an enduring symbol of the rule of law, a conviction that the language, concepts, and rules of the legal order can hold back the impulses toward violence, terror, and reciprocal vengeance. Faith in the code has redeemed the nation from the nightmare of the guillotine.
The metaphor of redemption should not pass our lips lightly. In its original meaning, it has legal connotations; something on loan gets returned to its owner. The older Jewish law of homicide relied on the metaphor of the Goel haDam, “the redeemer of blood” to refer to the victim’s next-of-kin who, under certain circumstances, could pursue the murderer and kill him. David Daube has interpreted this practice against the background assumption that at the time of a natural death, the life force—symbolized by blood—always returns to God.1 If the death occurs at the hand of another, the manslayer unnaturally acquires control over the victim’s “blood.” The Goel haDam, the redeemer-of-blood, executes the manslayer in order to release the victim’s blood, thus enabling it to return to its divine source. The notion that our life force belongs to God accounts for the views of virtually all secular liberal systems that no one can validly consent to his or her own killing at the hand of another.
It is tempting to extend this idea and to think of all humanity as enjoying a temporary privilege of life on earth. God somehow will redeem all of us at the end of history. In fact, the Jewish view, as it has evolved and matured, seems to have avoided this universalization of the idea that individual life stems from God. As the idea developed, the agent of redemption would be the Messiah, who would bring a reign of peace and harmony to life on earth. The redemption occurs in life as we know it. Orthodox Jewish culture takes the observance of God’s commandments, living under the rule of revealed law as interpreted by the rabbis, as the way to hasten the Messiah’s reign of harmony and order. The law, then, becomes the path toward redemption. Until the Prince of Peace comes to “fulfill the law,” or until the Apocalypse at the end of days, the secular law of the nation is the only means we have to work toward the perfection of life on earth.
The place of “blood” in the religious tradition of redemption proves to be subtle and problematic. There are some strains in the Jewish tradition that link the letting of blood with returning the soul to God. The “redeemer of blood” reminds us of that connection, as does the popular view that the founding of Israel stood in some kind of organic relationship with the Holocaust. The connection between blood and salvation becomes much stronger, however, in the Christian interpretation of its Jewish legacy. The theme of blood spilling from the body becomes powerful in the crucifixion and reaches its apotheosis in the faith that a great battle, an Apocalypse, must precede the Second Coming of the Messiah. The spilling of blood in a great battle is understood instinctively as the suffering that must precede redemption. As John Brown was led to the gallows on the eve of the Civil War, having unsuccessfully sought to stimulate a slave revolt, he handed one of his guards a note, “I John Brown am now quite certain that the crimes of this guilty land will never be purged away but with blood.”2
But blood alone does not save a nation from its sins. The argument here is that indulgence in evil—slavery, mass killing, persecution—must first issue in the suffering of the people. To overcome their sense of self-inflicted brutality, they turn to the law as the path of secular redemption. They search for stability after having succumbed to their baser instincts. The law provides a source of hope that the civil order can resist the recurrent slippage into violence and brutality. The important point is that the rule of law—not charity, not prayer, not animal sacrifice—should provide the means of secular redemption.
For nations as a whole to seek redemption, they must find a discipline that operates on them as a group, as a community. Individual acts of devotion will not suffice. Needed is the discipline represented by the law—the expression of communal cooperation, par excellence. The compromises and obligations of life under the law hardly makes sense to individuals standing alone, preoccupied by their own values and their own needs. The law redeems not the individual but the community or the nation as a whole.3
This view of the relationship between law and redemption finds expression in the Hebrew Bible, the Old Testament. It continues to inspire the law-based thinking of Judaism, Islam, the Catholic Church, and some Protestant theologians. The law given at Sinai, the law embedded in the covenant, is not the expression of individual aspiration but only of collective obligation. Seeking redemption or salvation through the church or through faith provides a way of cleansing ourselves of sin and, as it were, perfecting our individual creation.
Legal cultures, too, must seek to perfect themselves. They cannot exist simply as the product of will. When legal cultures lose sight of their natural end of bringing a reign of justice and harmony to human affairs, they decline into corruption and the arbitrariness of power. The German philosopher Gustav Radbruch defined the ideal of Law as the practice of establishing rules in the pursuit of justice.4 Communal life seeks, through law, to perfect itself. This secular idea parallels the eschatological aim of perfecting the creation of the world under God’s reign.
Seeking redemption under the law cannot simply be a desire for one’s parochial values to triumph in the courts. It matters which values are in play. And it matters how these values are debated in the legal culture. Debate about legal issues must be open and robust, and the very process of legal argument must communicate respect for the opposition. At the end of a legal argument, both sides must have the sense that they have been listened to, and that the dignity of the losing party is affirmed in the process of decision. Here, as well, we have much to learn from the model provided by the Jewish tradition of Talmudic debate. When a rabbi questioned how two of the greatest sages, Rabbis Hillel and Shammai, could persistently disagree, the response was: “These and these are the words of the living God.” Although Rabbi Hillel’s views are generally followed, Rabbi Shammai is treated, in defeat, with the greatest respect.
It is not surprising that when the established authority’s respect for the political opposition is debased, the legal culture invariably suffers. This is most noticeably clear in dictatorial societies where legal debate is reduced to little more than efforts to placate the powers that be. Although the National Socialists purported to rely on legal forms and administrative regularity, their contempt for free and mutually respectful discourse led to a corruption of the legal culture. The Nazis’ conception of law fluctuated between two unpalatable extremes. Sometimes the slogan was that law was what Hitler wanted and commanded (Recht is das, was der Führer will). At other times, utility to the German people was the ultimate source of legitimacy (Recht is das, was dem Volke nutzt).5 The National Socialist Party’s manipulation of these slogans and their observance of legal forms served only to bring the culture to a deeper level of corruption.
It is an extraordinary feature of postwar German culture that a new generation of jurists managed to save, to redeem, their concept of law from its racist and Nazi associations. In the wake of their unforgettable crimes against humanity, the West Germans, too, sought redemption in the rule of law, in the Rechtsstaat that they have cultivated along with economic prosperity. Living by the law, and seeking justice within the law, redeems the humanistic side of German culture. It has suppressed the romantic will to break all restraints for the sake of glory in power.
The Germans, too, have a civil code that has united them, since 1900, through the transitions from Bismarck, to Weimar, to the Third Reich, to the present. Yet, under the National Socialists, the code, which contains the provisions on family law, became tainted with notions of racial purity. Jews and Aryans could not marry. Of course, this stain disappeared in the postwar reform, but the memory remains of a corrupted civil code. Not surprisingly, then, Germans have sought redemption by promoting both a new constitution, enacted in 1949, and the rule of law in a united Europe. More than any country seeking redemption under law, the Germans identified their new constitution, the Grundgesetz, as the focal point of state authority. The sanctity of the constitution—and not the personal head of state—became the interest protected under the reformed law of treason. When West Germans felt their infant postwar republic endangered by Communist subversion, they appointed an agency to protect the integrity of the government. The announced aim of the agency was to protect the constitution (Verfassungsschutz).
The preamble of this charter, called the Basic Law (Grundgesetz), repeatedly reminds Germans of the imperative to atone for the sins of the past:

Conscious of its responsibility before God and humanity, possessed of the will to serve the peace of the world as an equal member of a United Europe, the German nation [Volk] commits itself, by virtue of its inherent constitution-making authority, to the following Basic Law.6

No other constitution, so far as I know, stresses its sense of “responsibility” and declares as one of its primary purposes “to serve the peace of the world.” These gestures recall the descent of the German nation into the evils of aggressive war and crimes against humanity.
The first article of the Basic Law invokes the humanistic Kantian underpinnings of German culture: “Human dignity is inviolable. All state power is obligated to protect it and respect it.” This provision provides the backdrop for interpreting all the basic rights guaranteed under the constitution. The protection of human dignity is the fundamental value suffusing the entire legal order. The highest virtue of the postwar German constitutional order, then, was precisely the greatest casualty of the Nazi regime. The path to redemption lay in reclaiming the liberal and humanistic values most systematically violated in their darkest hour. The point is carried forward in the second article: “Everyone has the right to flourishing of his or her personalit。 . Everyone has the right to life.”
These are provisions that enabled Germans to redefine their identities. They would no longer be the people devoted to the Volk above all. They would become the nation of human dignity that served the cause of human flourishing and the sanctity of human life. For the postwar Germans, then, the law, and particularly the Basic Law became the means for suppressing evil impulses and returning to the promises of an earlier national self. This is what redemption means in a secular legal world.
The redemptive impulse leads national courts to place an emphasis on values that resonate against past sins. The German Constitutional Court has made a number of controversial decisions that make sense primarily as efforts to resolve the burden of memory. The court decided to uphold a law abolishing the twenty-year statute of limitations for concentration camp murders.7 It invoked the constitutional “right to life” to strike down a liberal abortion law that permitted abortion on demand in the first trimester.8 And, more recently, the court rejected an East German statutory justification for border guards who shot at their own citizens trying to flee the country for the West.9 All of these decisions brought to the fore fundamental values of protecting life and punishing those with contempt for life. Yet, the particular German emphasis on these values would probably not appeal in the same measure to other European courts.
The Germans themselves have coined a unique, hard-to-translate phrase to describe the controversies that have driven their system of justice for the last fifty years. They call it Bewältigung der Vergangenheit—“overcoming” or “coming to grips with” the past. Settling accounts with the past provides a critical perspective on the process of redemption from evil. We cannot avoid the past, for we are all prisoners of it. In real life, we cannot reenact the forty years of wandering in the desert that the Hebrews had to endure before they could shake off their ingrained ways and a new generation could seek redemption under the law. In the world of practical politics, we must act now, and criminal punishment often provides the mechanism for distancing ourselves from the past so that we can start anew.


Civil War as the Path 
to Redemption

As France and Germany had their experiences of seeking redemption after reigns of terror, Americans, too, indulged in the mammoth bloodletting on the killing fields of the Civil War. When Lincoln sought to resupply Fort Sumter in Charleston harbor, and General Beauregard chose in response to fire on the federal fort, the long-simmering feud between North and South bled into brothers’ killing each other at close range. They fired their canons on Fort Sumter, they fixed their bayonets at Little Round Top, they lobbed shells onto Vicksburg until troops could seize the forts reigning over the Mississippi, they burned down Atlanta, and under William Tecumseh Sherman they scorched the earth on their march to the sea. The blue and the gray fell everywhere. And they were not sure why. They only had abstract ideas in their heads—some died for the Union, others for their separate nation. Over six hundred thousand lives stained the ground, more than all the former and subsequent American wars put together.
Having barely won reelection midway in this slaughter, Abraham Lincoln could only say of the reign of terror, “Woe unto the world because of offences!” We had descended into the bloodiest war of our history without clear purposes or any understanding of how it might end. “For it must needs be that offences come; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!” The self-inflicted pogrom is seen as a “woe” and a “scourge” inflicted for the terrible “offence” of slavery. Lincoln’s second inaugural address prayed for redemption. The nation had bled its sins onto its own soil and craved a rebirth of American civilization.
The survivors turned to law. One year into the war, after a string of Union defeats, Lincoln learned that the old Union could not possibly survive. “A new one had to be embraced.”10 And the new Union would have to be based on a new constitutional order. A nation of free Americans, including emancipated slaves, would bear responsibility for rebuilding the United States on the basis of a constitution acceptable to all. Formally speaking, the original charter of 1787 would remain in place, but it would be so radically transformed that it would stand to the ancien United States as the Code civil related to the French feudal order or, as any redeemed legal culture compares to the brutality and chaos that precedes it.
The American hope for a new beginning lay in the Reconstruction Amendments—the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth—all enacted in quest of a new definition of freedom and equality under the law. The first clause of the Fourteenth Amendment specified who would be a member of the new polity: “All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United State。 .” With a single stroke the new constitution erased the effects of one of the worst blemishes in American constitutional history—the Dred Scott decision of 1857, which held that persons of African descent could never become citizens of the United States. In the new United States, there would be no discrimination based on blood. The only question that mattered was whether you were born within the polity and whether you were therefore likely to come to maturity with the language and consciousness of American culture.
With just boundaries of the new nation-state properly defined, the highest order of business was to define the basic rights of its citizens. The structure of these rights follows the pattern established in the Declaration of Independence: life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. Yet, there was a new recognition that the inalienable rights of all Americans were now to be realized not in the state of nature but under the rule of law. The naturalistic “pursuit of happiness,” celebrated in the Declaration, gives way to the quintessential creature of the law’s definition—property. Yet, the basic rights of life, liberty, and property are inalienable without being absolute. The ideal must be adapted to the practical demands of competing claims. The legal system would have to decide when individuals could fairly be deprived of liberty or property or even of life; thus, the coining of the famous and influential clause of the American Constitution, namely that no “State [shall] deprive any person of life, liberty, or Property, without due Process of law.” The law would define the content and the limits of the inalienable rights celebrated in the Declaration of Independence.
Also, for the first time, the law would define duties incumbent on the states. The individual state governments must not only guarantee due process for all persons within their jurisdiction, they must also secure “the equal protection of the laws” for all to whom their power extends. True, the original Constitution places some limits on the legislative competence of the states. They must defer to the supremacy of federal law and recognize the privileges and immunities of the citizens of all other states.11 And there were specific restrictions: They could not enact bills of attainder, ex-post facto laws, or any “law impairing the obligation of contracts.”12 In the postbellum constitutional order, however, the states acquired a pervasive duty to treat their residents—those subject to their jurisdiction—decently.
This was a revolutionary change. The states were no longer the autonomous sovereigns that they thought they were when they claimed the right of secession. They were now, in fact, servants of their people. Governments existed to guarantee due process and equal justice for all. The local law was no longer simply a creature of the states. The states themselves were enmeshed in the law and subordinate to it.
In addition to embedding the states in the rule of law, the new constitutional order embarked on an affirmative program to ensure equality among those citizens subject to the jurisdiction of the United States. The heart of the new consensus is that the federal government, victorious in warfare, must continue its aggressive intervention in the lives of its citizens. It must protect the weak against the risk that they would slip into states of subordination resembling the past from which they sought to escape. According to the Thirteenth Amendment, there could never again be relationships of slavery or involuntary servitude in the United States. The federal government would have to be ever watchful to insure that this kind of slippage would never occur in the private relationships among citizens. Furthermore, under the “equal protection clause,” the states must recognize and promote the equality of those subject to their jurisdiction. To round out the commitment to equality, according to the Fifteenth Amendment ratified in 1870, the states could no longer deny voting rights to citizens on the grounds of their race, color, or previous condition of servitude.
These objectives and guarantees are insufficient in themselves to create a constitution, a framework of government. One needs, in addition, a definition of legislative empowerment that would enable the federal government to realize its commitments. This definition is laid down in all three of the postbellum amendments. All three grant the power to Congress to enforce the basic framework “with appropriate legislation.” True, the new Congress takes as a given many of the provisions of the original Constitution. The new order inherits an operating Congress, Executive, and Judiciary. They would be recast in new functions, but the forms remained the same.
The argument, then, is that the three Reconstruction Amendments enacted a second American constitution. The terms of this constitution, as culled from the amendments—with some rearrangement and leaving out historically specific clauses—can be stated in a few words:

The Second American Constitution
§1. All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside.
§2. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States.
§3. No State shall deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.
§4. No State shall deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. 
§5. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States.
§6. The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.
§7. The Congress shall have power to enforce the foregoing provisions by appropriate legislation.

These seven propositions summarize the enduring content of the Reconstruction Amendments.13 The key provisions of these amendments define political membership, articulate basic rights, and provide an ambit of legislative competence. So reformed, the American system of government would be able to protect individual rights as well as promote the equality of all persons who survived the war. Of course, we must assume a set of institutions—a Congress, an Executive, and a Judiciary—that will continue to function according to the terms of their initial creation.
Still, there is something missing in this filtering off of the three Reconstruction Amendments and calling them a separate constitution. The missing factor is the consciousness of setting forth a new framework of government, a structure based on values fundamentally different from those that went before. To find that consciousness, we need to turn, I wish to argue, to the critical message of the Civil War, the address that would generate a new normative world in which to make sense of the epic war that consumed America from the firing on Fort Sumter to the surrender at Appomattox. The new Nomos, the new framework of values that necessitated a new constitution, comes forth in one of the great prayers of the American civil religion, the Gettysburg Address. It is worth recalling some of the enduring phrases of this civil prayer, the incantations that reverberated in American consciousness:

Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new natio。 .
[This nation was] conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
From these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion.
We resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain, that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedo。 .
Government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth.
In the ensuing chapters, we will look at these words and the entire address in greater detail. For now, I wish to make the unusual claim that these revered words serve as the preamble for the constitutional order that emerged from the unification of the nation. They are a preamble in much the same sense that the language beginning “Conscious of our responsibility before God and humanity” provides the organizing principle of the new German constitution or the following words echo in memory as the convening of the Philadelphia Constitution:

We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect Union, establish justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.

Constitutional preambles speak in prophecy. They set forth a vision of the future—for the broad purposes of the national charter that they introduce. And, most important, they define who the people are who share in the constitutional vision. The original preamble in the Philadelphia version stressed the position of “We the People” as the enactors of the Constitution. For Lincoln, the body politic expressing itself in the new constitution included the prior generations who “four score and seven years ago” adopted, with great courage, that proposition of equality that gave birth to the American nation. Those represented in the new order included the dead at Gettysburg and at all the battlefields of the war who, if the new order is realized, “shall not have died in vain.” And, furthermore, because he avoided all partisan references in his address, he clearly meant to articulate a conception of the nation that included the South as well as the North, black as well as white. Ultimately, the beneficiaries of the new order would be the future generations of the nation, those who would flourish under “a new birth of freedom.”
To say that the Gettysburg Address provides the preamble to a new constitutional order is, to say the least, a bold claim. When Lincoln took the train up to Gettysburg in November 1863, he had in mind only to comfort the mourners of those who died in the fierce four-day battle in early July. The bodies were being pulled together from the battlefield and spared further decay. The soil was turned and the dead laid to rest. The battle had turned the tide of the war—just barely, mind you—and it was time that the president began to articulate the meaning of the long suffering that culminated in the gruesome hand-to-hand fighting in the Gettysburg fields.
At the ceremony dedicating the Gettysburg cemetery, Lincoln was designated the second speaker. The renowned orator Edward Everett spoke for two hours before the president mounted the podium. He had a written text with him that amounted to about 268 words.14 Perhaps Everett prepared the audience to absorb the poignancy of Lincoln’s message. Perhaps the very brevity of Lincoln’s words lent them additional power. The impact of the address was felt not only by the mourners gathered at the new cemetery but by an entire country yearning for a sense of meaning in the bloodshed.
True, the Gettysburg Address was not legally binding, but preambles are never meant to have the status of positive law. They are designed to explain why it is necessary for the government to bind itself to certain objectives. Lincoln’s preamble, accepted in the hearts of the nation, explains the meaning of the war and provides a guide to the building of a constitutional order based on nationhood, equality, and democracy. The setting of clear goals in inspiring language—this is all one can expect of a constitutional preamble.
This constitutional order stands in radical contrast to the Constitution drafted in Philadelphia and amended by the Bill of Rights in 1791. It defines membership in the American nation, it brings the principle of equality to the fore, and it initiates the process of extending the franchise to virtually all adult citizens. The original Constitution did none of these things. It slighted the problems of nationality and citizenship, it sidestepped the problem of equality, and it minimized the significance of popular democracy.


The Irrelevance of 
Original Intent

At the outset, I should be clear about the claims I am not making and the methods I am not using. Above all, I am not making an argument about the “original intent” that lay behind the Reconstruction Amendments. Nothing strikes me as intellectually and morally more impoverished than the current trend in constitutional scholarship to believe that the wishes, desires, and intentions of the founders should determine the content of our Constitution. There are two major hurdles that the advocates of this method have never negotiated. First, we need an argument about whose wishes, desires, and intentions really matter. If we think we are bound by a certain take on the world that prevailed in 1787, 1791, or 1868, then we should decide whose sentiments matter. Should we look to the people who wrote the document, to the majority who voted for it, to the states who ratified it, or to the “people” as a whole for whom these various democratic agents acted? Among all these possible sources of “original intent,” there was intense conflict. I would imagine that even those who actually voted for and against various drafts suffered from doubt and changing sentiments. But even if each person voting had a concrete intention to support every sentence he or she endorsed, there is no coherent way of finding a common denominator among their divergent positions. A single intent cannot unify the inevitable cacophony of desires that stand behind every piece of legislation. But let us suppose there was a single intent of the group. We then encounter a more basic question: Why should we care what the founders actually thought?
The best political theory to support the relevance of original intent would be to think of the lawgiver as something like a military commander.15 The commander wants us to do something, and has used the language of the law to move us toward action. We should try to figure out what these purposes are and execute them. And if we don’t? Well, the commander cannot really punish us, but somehow we would be breaking faith with the framers if we don’t act with the appropriate subservience or at least act as though we were submissive to the original intent of the founders. This, I regret to say, is the best reconstruction I can offer for a view that never seems to get articulated; namely, why we should pay so much attention to the wishes and desires of the agents who bequeathed to us the words we live by.
In great historical moments of law making as well as literature, writers choose words that resonate far beyond their original context. When the representatives of the colonies “pledged their sacred honor” in July 1776 to a document that included the words “All men are created equal,” they may merely have intended to stress the equality of all “collective” peoples: the new Americans had as much right to choose their form of government as did the British. They also could have had the limited purpose of arguing that they were of the same moral status as King George III. If all men are created equal, then no one of them can claim to be anointed as ruler by divine right. The only source of legitimacy, as the Declaration argues, is the “consent of the governed.” Whatever their intentions as individuals or as a group may have been, their words had lasting significance. They bequeathed a great maxim to the American people—a maxim that would in due course serve as the battle cry of emancipation.
When the drafters and ratifiers of the Fourteenth Amendment adopted a commitment to equality under the law, they did not think particularly about whether they wanted to bring about integrated schools. Yet, a vast literature has grown up around the question of whether the “original intent” of the Fourteenth Amendment was to integrate the schools—an event that the Court did not mandate until 1954 in Brown v Board of Education.16 The dispute seems to be entirely irrelevant.17 The complex body of national and state legislators who drafted, passed, and ratified the Fourteenth Amendment did not think about a single system of education for blacks and whites. There were too many other issues on their minds. We cannot attribute to them an intention to have all Americans study together in the same classroom, nor can we burden their memory with a commitment to keep black and white forever apart.
Those who frame constitutions and constitutional amendments obviously have some purpose in mind, but the purposes are typically abstract. If they want to bring about equality among all Americans, they do not want to be bothered with working out precisely what equality means at each stage of historical evolution. If you had asked them whether, ninety years later, the schools should be desegregated, they would have been nonplussed by the question. “Well, that is the reason we have courts,” would have been the typical reply. The Fourteenth Amendment established an ideal, it affirmed an idea that has roots in the Declaration of Independence. The drafters implicitly endorsed the principle that all men are created equal and because they are created equal, they are entitled to equal treatment before the law. What this language should mean in practice was not their concern. Together with scholars who reflect on the ideas behind the law, the courts assume responsibility for the proper interpretation of the language that constitutes a shared heritage of government principles.
I never cease to be amazed that legal scholars, particularly in the United States, continue to be confused about the relevance of the framers’ original intent. Secular legal systems could not possibly be more demanding, more deferential to authority, than religious cultures that believe that their binding legal principles were declared by God. Yet, a story from the Talmud beautifully illustrates the folly of invoking original intent in a dispute about the meaning of God’s commandments. A group of rabbis were engaged in a debate about whether a particular earthenware oven was kosher or not. One of them, Rabbi Eliezer, said no; the other rabbis said yes. Rabbi Eliezer proceeded to invoke a variety of fantastic signs to support his view: at his command, a carob tree was uprooted and flew across the field, a stream flowed upstream, and the walls started to collapse before they were halted. The rabbis were not impressed by these signs. Then Rabbi Eliezer, desperate and alone, invoked the argument of original intent: “If I am right, let heaven be the proof.” A heavenly voice then proclaimed: “How dare you oppose Rabbi Eliezer, whose views are everywhere the law.” Rabbi Joshua arose and quoted Deuteronomy: “It is not in Heaven.” Rabbi Jeremiah explained the reference: Ever since the Torah was given at Mount Sinai, “we pay no attention to heavenly voices, for God already wrote in the Torah at Mount Sinai.”18 The point is that once the language is released and given to jurists to fashion to the needs of their time, the task of lawgivers is finished. Their intentions and desires cannot rule—either from the grave or from heaven.
The intention of those who framed the Reconstruction Amendments should, therefore, not control their interpretation today. But what about the intention of Abraham Lincoln, when he mounted the podium on November 19, 1863? There are some who will say that if Lincoln did not intend specifically to articulate the preamble to a new constitution, then the words spoken at Gettysburg could not possibly be, as I claim, the preamble to the postbellum constitution. If Roosevelt did not intend to amend the Constitution with his court-packing plan, then the resulting changes in Supreme Court attitudes could not constitute a de facto amendment, a radical transformation of American law.
Here we take a page from British constitutional history to understand how a practice can be become part of the accumulated historical constitution without this being the purpose of those who initiated the practice. The British Constitution remains, as is well known, famously unwritten. Customary rules determine the role of the Crown in a system that has evolved as a constitutional monarchy. Only the accepted practice of generations prescribes that the queen must sign legislation for it to be binding as law or that the queen may intervene, under certain circumstances, to break a party deadlock and select a nominee for prime minister.19 In all systems of customary law, the relevant perspective is not that of those who first engage in the practice but rather of those who witness the pattern of the past and adopt it as binding on themselves. So it is with the Gettysburg Address. The right question is not what Lincoln intended, but rather what the words meant to those who looked to them as the explanation of the war and as a charter for freedom and equality for all Americans. If the address had been ignored, it would not have mattered what Lincoln intended. But because these 268 words20 were adopted into the civil religion of the United States—the secular meditation on who we were and what we were about—their life after formal recitation by the president determines their constitutional status. They are the preamble to the constitutional order because we came to understand them as nearly sacred. And although we did not until now think of this secular prayer as the preamble to a new order of nationhood, equality, and democracy, that is what they became.
These words are, in fact, better known in the United States than the preamble to the first Constitution. Schoolchildren routinely recite them and thereby imbibe the intuition that these words defined America after the Civil War. Yet, because we know these resonant phrases, we rarely stop to listen and ponder the meaning of each well-crafted line. Let us now put ourselves among the crowd of mourners at Gettysburg. Let us transport ourselves back into the frame of mind of those suffering losses, those looking for the meaning of brothers slaughtering brothers.

Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great Civil War, testing whether that nation or any nation so conceived and so dedicated can long endure. We are met on a great battlefield of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this. But in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate—we cannot consecrate—we cannot hallow this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here have consecrated it far above our poor power to add or detract. The world will little note nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget what they did here. It is for us the living, rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us—that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion—that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain, that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom, and that government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the earth.





Chapter 1
Prolegomenon to a General Biology
ecturing in Dublin, one of the twentieth century’s most famous physicists set the stage of contemporary biology during the war-heavy year of 1944. Given Erwin Schrödinger’s towering reputation as the discoverer of the Schrödinger equation, the fundamental formulation of quantum mechanics, his public lectures and subsequent book were bound to draw high attention. But no one, not even Schrödinger himself, was likely to have foreseen the consequences. Schrödinger’s What Is Life? is credited with inspiring a generation of physicists and biologists to seek the fundamental character of living systems. Schrödinger brought quantum mechanics, chemistry, and the still poorly formulated concept of “information” into biology. He is the progenitor of our understanding of DNA and the genetic code. Yet as brilliant as was Schrödinger’s insight, I believe he missed the center. Investigations seeks that center and finds, in fact, a mystery.
In my previous two books, I laid out some of the growing reasons to think that evolution was even richer than Darwin supposed. Modern evolutionary theory, based on Darwin’s concept of descent with heritable variations that are sifted by natural selection to retain the adaptive changes, has come to view selection as the sole source of order in biological organisms. But the snowflake’s delicate sixfold symmetry tells us that order can arise without the benefit of natural selection. Origins of Order and At Home in the Universe give good grounds to think that much of the order in organisms, from the origin of life itself to the stunning order in the development of a newborn child from a fertilized egg, does not reflect selection alone. Instead, much of the order in organisms, I believe, is self-organized and spontaneous. Self-organization mingles with natural selection in barely understood ways to yield the magnificence of our teeming biosphere. We must, therefore, expand evolutionary theory.
Yet we need something far more important than a broadened evolutionary theory. Despite any valid insights in my own two books, and despite the fine work of many others, including the brilliance manifest in the past three decades of molecular biology, the core of life itself remains shrouded from view. We know chunks of molecular machinery, metabolic pathways, means of membrane biosynthesis = we know many of the parts and many of the processes. But what makes a cell alive is still not clear to us. The center is still mysterious.
And so I began my notebook “Investigations” in December of 1994, a full half century after Schrödinger’s What Is Life?, as an intellectual enterprise unlike any I had undertaken before. Rather bravely and thinking with some presumptuousness of Wittgenstein’s famous Philosophical Investigations, which had shattered the philosophical tradition of logical atomism in which he had richly participated, I betook myself to my oYce at home in Santa Fe and grandly intoned through my fingers onto the computer’s disc, “Investigations,” on December 4, 1994. I sensed my long search would uncover issues that were then only dimly visible to me. I hoped the unfolding, ongoing notebook would allow me to find the themes and link them into something that was vast and new but at the time inarticulate.
Two years later, in September of 1996, I published a modestly well-organized version of Investigations as a Santa Fe Institute preprint, launched it onto the web, and put it aside for the time being. I found I had indeed been led into arenas that I had in no way expected, led by a swirl of ever new questions. I put the notebooks aside, but a year later I returned to the swirl, taking up again a struggle to see something that, I think, is right in front of us = always the hardest thing to see. This book is the fruit of these eVorts. And this first chapter is but an introduction, in brief, to the themes that will be explained more fully in the following chapters. I would ask the reader to be patient with unfamiliar terms and concepts.
My first eVorts had begun with twin questions. First, in addition to the known laws of thermodynamics, could there possibly be a fourth law of thermodynamics for open thermodynamic systems, some law that governs biospheres anywhere in the cosmos or the cosmos itself? Second, living entities = bacteria, plants, and animals = manipulate the world on their own behalf: the bacterium swimming upstream in a glucose gradient that is easily said to be going to get “dinner”; the paramecium, cilia beating like a Roman warship’s oars, hot after the bacterium; we humans earning our livings. Call the bacterium, paramecium, and us humans “autonomous agents,” able to act on our own behalf in an environment.
My second and core question became, What must a physical system be to be an autonomous agent? Make no mistake, we autonomous agents mutually construct our biosphere, even as we coevolve in it. Why and how this is so is a central subject of all that follows.
From the outset, there were, and remain, reasons for deep skepticism about the enterprise of Investigations. First, there are very strong arguments to say that there can be no general law for open thermodynamic systems. The core argument is simple to state. Any computer program is an algorithm that, given data, produces some sequence of output, finite or infinite. Computer programs can always be written in the form of a binary symbol string of 1 and 0 symbols. All possible binary symbol strings are possible computer programs. Hence, there is a countable, or denumerable, infinity of computer programs. A theorem states that for most computer programs, there is no compact description of the printout of the program. Rather, we must just unleash the program and watch it print what it prints. In short, there is no shorter description of the output of the program than that which can be obtained by running the program itself. If by the concept of a “law” we mean a compact description, ahead of time, of what the computer program will print then for any such program, there can be no law that allows us to predict what the program will actually do ahead of the actual running of the program.
The next step is simple. Any such program can be realized on a universal Turing machine such as the familiar computer. But that computer is an open nonequilibrium thermodynamic system, its openness visibly realized by the plug and power line that connects the computer to the electric power grid. Therefore, and I think this conclusion is cogent, there can be no general law for all possible nonequilibrium thermodynamic systems.
So why was I conjuring the possibility of a general law for open thermodynamic systems? Clearly, no such general law can hold for all open thermodynamic systems.
But hold a moment. It is we humans who conceived and built the intricate assembly of chips and logic gates that constitute a computer, typically we humans who program it, and we humans who contrived the entire power grid that supplies the electric power to run the computer itself. This assemblage of late-twentieth-century technology did not assemble itself. We built it.
On the other hand, no one designed and built the biosphere. The biosphere got itself constructed by the emergence and persistent coevolution of autonomous agents. If there cannot be general laws for all open thermodynamic systems, might there be general laws for thermodynamically open but self-constructing systems such as biospheres? I believe that the answer is yes. Indeed, among those candidate laws to be discussed in this book is a candidate fourth law of thermodynamics for such self-constructing systems.
To roughly state the candidate law, I suspect that biospheres maximize the average secular construction of the diversity of autonomous agents and the ways those agents can make a living to propagate further. In other words, on average, bio-spheres persistently increase the diversity of what can happen next. In eVect, as we shall see later, biospheres may maximize the average sustained growth of their own “dimensionality.”
Thus, the enterprise of Investigations soon began to center on the character of the autonomous agents whose coevolution constructs a biosphere. I was gradually led to a labyrinth of issues concerning the core features of autonomous agents able to manipulate the world on their own behalf. It may be that those core features capture a proper definition of life and that definition diVers from the one Schrödinger found.
To state my hypothesis abruptly and without preamble, I think an autonomous agent is a self-reproducing system able to perform at least one thermodynamic work cycle. It will require most of this book to unfold the implications of this tentative definition.
Following an eVort to understand what an autonomous agent might be = which, as just noted, involves the concept of work cycles = I was led to the concepts of work itself, constraints, and work as the constrained release of energy. In turn, this led to the fact that work itself is often used to construct constraints on the release of energy that then constitutes further work. So we confront a virtuous cycle: Work constructs constraints, yet constraints on the release of energy are required for work to be done. Here is the heart of a new concept of “organization” that is not covered by our concepts of matter alone, energy alone, entropy alone, or information alone. In turn, this led me to wonder about the relation between the emergence of constraints in the universe and in a biosphere, and the diversification of patterns of the constrained release of energy that alone constitute work and the use of that work to build still further constraints on the release of energy. How do biospheres construct themselves or how does the universe construct itself?
The considerations above led to the role of Maxwell’s demon, one of the major places in physics where matter, energy, work, and information come together. The central point of the demon is that by making measurements on a system, the information gained can be used to extract work. I made a new distinction between measurements the demon might make that reveal features of nonequilibrium systems that can be used to extract work, and measurements he might make of the nonequilibrium system that cannot be used to extract work. How does the demon know what features to measure? And, in turn, how does work actually come to be extracted by devices that measure and detect displacements from equilibrium from which work can, in principle, be obtained? An example of such a device is a windmill pivoting to face the wind, then extracting work by the wind turning its vanes. Other examples are the rhodopsin molecule of a bacterium responding to a photon of light or a chloroplast using the constrained release of the energy of light to construct high-energy sugar molecules. How do such devices come into existence in the unfolding universe and in our biosphere? How does the vast web of constraint construction and constrained energy release used to construct yet more constraints happen into existence in the biosphere? In the universe itself? The answers appear not to be present in contemporary physics, chemistry, or biology. But a coevolving biosphere accomplishes just this coconstruction of propagating organization.
Thus, in due course, I struggled with the concept of organization itself, concluding that our concepts of entropy and its negative, Shannon’s information theory (which was developed initially to quantify telephonic traYc and had been greatly extended since then) entirely miss the central issues. What is happening in a biosphere is that autonomous agents are coconstructing and propagating organizations of work, of constraint construction, and of task completion that continue to propagate and proliferate diversifying organization.
This statement is just plain true. Look out your window, burrow down a foot or so, and try to establish what all the microscopic life is busy doing and building and has done for billions of years, let alone the macroscopic ecosystem of plants, herbivores, and carnivores that is slipping, sliding, hiding, hunting, bursting with flowers and leaves outside your window. So, I think, we lack a concept of propagating organization.
Then too there is the mystery of the emergence of novel functionalities in evolution where none existed before: hearing, sight, flight, language. Whence this novelty? I was led to doubt that we could prestate the novelty. I came to doubt that we could finitely prestate all possible adaptations that might arise in a biosphere. In turn, I was led to doubt that we can prestate the “configuration space” of a biosphere.
But how strange a conclusion. In statistical mechanics, with its famous liter box of gas as an isolated thermodynamic system, we can prestate the configuration space of all possible positions and momenta of the gas particles in the box. Then Ludwig Boltzmann and Willard Gibbs taught us how to calculate macroscopic properties such as pressure and temperature as equilibrium averages over the configuration space. State the laws and the initial and boundary conditions, then calculate; Newton taught us how to do science this way. What if we cannot prestate the configuration space of a biosphere and calculate with Newton’s “method of fluxions,” the calculus, from initial and boundary conditions and laws? Whether we can calculate or not does not slow down the persistent evolution of novelty in the biosphere. But a biosphere is just another physical system. So what in the world is going on? Literally, what in the world is going on?
We have much to investigate. At the end, I think we will know more than at the outset. But Investigations is at best a mere beginning.
It is well to return to Schrödinger’s brilliant insights and his attempt at a central definition of life as a well-grounded starting place. Schrödinger ‘s What Is Life? provided a surprising answer to his enquiry about the central character of life by posing a core question: What is the source of the astonishing order in organisms? The standard = and Schrödinger argued, incorrect = answer, lay in statistical physics. If an ink drop is placed in still water in a petri dish, it will diVuse to a uniform equilibrium distribution. That uniform distribution is an average over an enormous number of atoms or molecules and is not due to the behavior of individual molecules. Any local fluctuations in ink concentration soon dissipate back to equilibrium.
Could statistical averaging be the source of order in organisms? Schrödinger based his argument on the emerging field of experimental genetics and the recent data on X-ray induction of heritable genetic mutations. Calculating the “target size” of such mutations, Schrödinger realized that a gene could comprise at most a few hundred or thousand atoms.
The sizes of statistical fluctuations familiar from statistical physics scale as the square root of the number of particles, N. Consider tossing a fair coin 10,000 times. The result will be about 50 percent heads, 50 percent tails, with a fluctuation of about 100, which is the square root of 10,000. Thus, a typical fluctuation from 50:50 heads and tails is 100/10,000 or 1 percent. Let the number of coin flips be 100 million, then the fluctuations are its square root, or 10,000. Dividing, 10,000/100,000,000 yields a typical deviation of .01 percent from 50:50.
Schrödinger reached the correct conclusion: If genes are constituted by as few as several hundred atoms, the familiar statistical fluctuations predicted by statistical mechanics would be so large that heritability would be essentially impossible. Spontaneous mutations would happen at a frequency vastly larger than observed. The source of order must lie elsewhere.
Quantum mechanics, argued Schrödinger, comes to the rescue of life. Quantum mechanics ensures that solids have rigidly ordered molecular structures. A crystal is the simplest case. But crystals are structurally dull. The atoms are arranged in a regular lattice in three dimensions. If you know the positions of all the atoms in a minimal-unit crystal, you know where all the other atoms are in the entire crystal. This overstates the case, for there can be complex defects, but the point is clear. Crystals have very regular structures, so the diVerent parts of the crystal, in some sense, all “say” the same thing. As shown below, Schrödinger translated the idea of “saying” into the idea of “encoding.” With that leap, a regular crystal cannot encode much “information.” All the information is contained in the unit cell.
If solids have the order required but periodic solids such as crystals are too regular, then Schrödinger puts his bet on aperiodic solids. The stuV of the gene, he bets, is some form of aperiodic crystal. The form of the aperiodicity will contain some kind of microscopic code that somehow controls the development of the organism. The quantum character of the aperiodic solid will mean that small discrete changes, or mutations, will occur. Natural selection, operating on these small discrete changes, will select out favorable mutations, as Darwin hoped.
Fifty years later, I find Schrödinger’s argument fascinating and brilliant. At once he envisioned what became, by 1953, the elucidation of the structure of DNA’s aperiodic double helix by James Watson and Francis Crick, with the famously understated comment in their original paper that its structure suggests its mode of replication and its mode of encoding genetic information.
Fifty years later we know very much more. We know the human genome harbors some 80,000 to 100,000 “structural genes,” each encoding the RNA that, after being transcribed from the DNA, is translated according to the genetic code to a linear sequence of amino acids, thereby constituting a protein. From Schrödinger to the establishment of the code required only about twenty years.
Beyond the brilliance of the core of molecular genetics, we understand much concerning developmental biology. Humans have about 260 diVerent cell types: liver, nerve, muscle. Each is a diVerent pattern of expression of the 80,000 or 100,000 genes. Since the work of François Jacob and Jacques Monod thirty-five years ago, biologists have understood that the protein transcribed from one gene might turn other genes on or oV. Some vast network of regulatory interactions among genes and their products provides the mechanism that marshals the genome into the dance of development.
We have come close to Schrödinger’s dream. But have we come close to answering his question, What is life? The answer almost surely is no. I am unable to say, all at once, why I believe this, but I can begin to hint at an explanation. Investigations is a search for an answer. I am not entirely convinced of what lies within this book; the material is too new and far too surprising to warrant conviction. Yet the pathways I have stumbled along, glimpsing what may be a terra nova, do seem to me to be worth serious presentation and serious consideration.
Quite to my astonishment, the story that will unfold here suggests a novel answer to the question, What is life? I had not expected even the outlines of an answer, and I am astonished because I have been led in such unexpected directions. One direction suggests that an answer to this question may demand a fundamental alteration in how we have done science since Newton. Life is doing something far richer than we may have dreamed, literally something incalculable. What is the place of law if, as hinted above, the variables and configuration space cannot be prespecified for a biosphere, or perhaps a universe? Yet, I think, there are laws. And if these musings be true, we must rethink science itself.
Perhaps I can point again at the outset to the central question of an autonomous agent. Consider a bacterium swimming upstream in a glucose gradient, its flagellar motor rotating. If we naively ask, “What is it doing?” we unhesitatingly answer something like, “It’s going to get dinner.” That is, without attributing consciousness or conscious purpose, we view the bacterium as acting on its own behalf in an environment. The bacterium is swimming upstream in order to obtain the glucose it needs. Presumably we have in mind something like the Darwinian criteria to unpack the phrase, “on its own behalf.” Bacteria that do obtain glucose or its equivalent may survive with higher probability than those incapable of the flagellar motor trick, hence, be selected by natural selection.
An autonomous agent is a physical system, such as a bacterium, that can act on its own behalf in an environment. All free-living cells and organisms are clearly autonomous agents. The quite familiar, utterly astonishing feature of autonomous agents = E. coli, paramecia, yeast cells, algae, sponges, flat worms, annelids, all of us = is that we do, everyday, manipulate the universe around us. We swim, scramble, twist, build, hide, snuZe, pounce.
Yet the bacterium, the yeast cell, and we all are just physical systems. Physicists, biologists, and philosophers no longer look for a mysterious élan vital, some ethereal vital force that animates matter. Which leads immediately to the central, and confusing, question: What must a physical system be such that it can act on its own behalf in an environment? What must a physical system be such that it constitutes an autonomous agent? I will leap ahead to state now my tentative answer: A molecular autonomous agent is a self-reproducing molecular system able to carry out one or more thermodynamic work cycles.
All free-living cells are, by this definition, autonomous agents. To take a simple example, our bacterium with its flagellar motor rotating and swimming upstream for dinner is, in point of plain fact, a self-reproducing molecular system that is carrying out one or more thermodynamic work cycles. So is the paramecium chasing the bacterium, hoping for its own dinner. So is the dinoflagellate hunting the paramecium sneaking up on the bacterium. So are the flower and flatworm. So are you and I.
It will take a while to fully explore this definition. Unpacking its implications reveals much that I did not remotely anticipate. An early insight is that an autonomous agent must be displaced from thermodynamic equilibrium. Work cycles cannot occur at equilibrium. Thus, the concept of an agent is, inherently, a nonequilibrium concept. So too at the outset it is clear that this new concept of an autonomous agent is not contained in Schrödinger’s answer. Schrödinger’s brilliant leap to aperiodic solids encoding the organism that unleashed mid-twentieth-century biology appears to be but a glimmer of a far larger story.
Footprints of Destiny: The Birth of Astrobiology
The telltale beginnings of that larger story are beginning to be formulated. The U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Agency has had a long program in “exobiology,” the search for life elsewhere in the universe. Among its well-known interests are SETI, a search for extraterrestrial life, and the Mars probes. Over the past three decades, a sustained eVort has included a wealth of experiments aiming at discovering the abiotic origins of the organic molecules that are the building blocks of known living systems.
In the summer of 1997, NASA was busy attempting to formulate what it came to call “astrobiology,” an attempt to understand the origin, evolution, and characteristics of life anywhere in the universe. Astrobiology does not yet exist = it is a field in the birthing process. Whatever the area comes to be called as it matures, it seems likely to be a field of spectacular success and deep importance in the coming century. A hint of the potential impact of astrobiology came in August 1997 with the tentative but excited reports of a Martian meteorite found in Antarctica that, NASA scientists announced, might have evidence of early Martian microbial life. The White House organized the single-day “Space Conference,” to which I was pleased to be invited. Perhaps thirty-five scientists and scholars gathered in the Old Executive OYce Building for a meeting led by Vice President Gore. The vice president began the meeting with a rather unexpected question to the group: If it should prove true that the Martian rock actually harbored fossilized microbial life, what would be the least interesting result? 
The room was silent, for a moment. Then Stephen Jay Gould gave the answer many of us must have been considering: “Martian life turns out to be essentially identical to Earth life, same DNA, RNA, proteins, code.” Were it so, then we would all envision life flitting from planet to planet in our solar system. It turns out that a minimum transit time for a fleck of Martian soil kicked into space to make it to earth is about fifteen thousand years. Spores can survive that long under desiccating conditions.
“And what,” continued the vice president, “would be the most interesting result?” Ah, said many of us, in diVerent voices around the room: Martian life is radically diVerent from Earth life.
If radically diVerent, then.   .   .   .   
If radically diVerent, then life must not be improbable.
If radically diVerent, then life may be abundant among the myriad stars and solar systems, on far planets hinted at by our current astronomy.
If radically diVerent and abundant, then we are not alone.
If radically diVerent and abundant, then we inhabit a universe rife with the creativity to create life.
If radically diVerent, then = thought I of my just published second book = we are at home in the universe.
If radically diVerent, then we are on the threshold of a new biology, a “general biology” freed from the confines of our known example of Earth life.
If radically diVerent, then a new science seeking the origins, evolution, characteristics, and laws that may govern biospheres anywhere.
A general biology awaits us. Call it astrobiology if you wish. We confront the vast new task of understanding what properties and laws, if any, may characterize bio-spheres anywhere in the universe. I find the prospect stunning. I will argue that the concept of an autonomous agent will be central to the enterprise of a general biology.
A personally delightful moment arose during that meeting. The vice president, it appeared, had read At Home in the Universe, or parts of it. In At Home, and also in this book, I explore a theory I believe has deep merit, one that asserts that, in complex chemical reaction systems, self-reproducing molecular systems form with high probability.
The vice president looked across the table at me and asked, “Dr. KauVman, don’t you have a theory that in complex chemical reaction systems life arises more or less spontaneously?”
“Yes.”
“Well, isn’t that just sensible?”
I was, of course, rather thrilled, but somewhat embarrassed. “The theory has been tested computationally, but there are no molecular experiments to support it,” I answered.
“But isn’t it just sensible?” the vice president persisted.
I couldn’t help my response, “Mr. Vice President, I have waited a long time for such confirmation. With your permission, sir, I will use it to bludgeon my enemies.”
I’m glad to say there was warm laughter around the table. Would that scientific proof were so easily obtained. Much remains to be done to test my theory.
Many of us, including Mr. Gore, while maintaining skepticism about the Mars rock itself, spoke at that meeting about the spiritual impact of the discovery of life elsewhere in the universe. The general consensus was that such a discovery, linked to the sense of membership in a creative universe, would alter how we see ourselves and our place under all, all the suns. I find it a gentle, thrilling, quiet, and transforming vision.
Molecular Diversity
We are surprisingly well poised to begin an investigation of a general biology, for such a study will surely involve the understanding of the collective behaviors of very complex chemical reaction networks. After all, all known life on earth is based on the complex webs of chemical reactions = DNA, RNA, proteins, metabolism, linked cycles of construction and destruction = that form the life cycles of cells. In the past decade we have crossed a threshold that will rival the computer revolution. We have learned to construct enormously diverse “libraries” of diVerent DNA, RNA, proteins, and other organic molecules. Armed with such high-diversity libraries, we are in a position to begin to study the properties of complex chemical reaction networks.
To begin to understand the molecular diversity revolution, consider a crude estimate of the total organic molecular diversity of the biosphere. There are perhaps a hundred million species. Humans have about a hundred thousand structural genes, encoding that many diVerent proteins. If all the genes within a species were identical, and all the genes in diVerent species were at least slightly diVerent, the biosphere would harbor about ten trillion diVerent proteins. Within a few orders of magnitude, ten trillion will serve as an estimate of the organic molecular diversity of the natural biosphere. But the current technology of molecular diversity that generates libraries of more or less random DNA, RNA, or proteins now routinely produces a diversity of a hundred trillion molecular species in a single test tube.
In our hubris, we rival the biosphere.
The field of molecular diversity was born to help solve the problem of drug discovery. The core concept is simple. Consider a human hormone such as estrogen. Estrogen acts by binding to a specific receptor protein; think of the estrogen as a “key” and the receptor as a “lock.” Now generate sixty-four million diVerent small proteins, called peptides, say, six amino acids in length. (Since there are twenty types of amino acids, the number of possible hexamers is 20ﬂ, hence, sixty-four million.) The sixty-four million hexamer peptides are candidate second keys, any one of which might be able to fit into the same estrogen receptor lock into which estrogen fits. If so, any such second key may be similar to the first key, estrogen, and hence is a candidate drug to mimic or modulate estrogen.
To find such an estrogen mimic, take many identical copies of the estrogen receptor, afix them to the bottom of a petri plate, and expose them simultaneously to all sixty-four million hexamers. Wash oV all the peptides that do not stick to the estrogen receptor, then recover those hexamers that do stick to the estrogen receptor. Any such peptide is a second key that binds the estrogen receptor locks and, hence, is a candidate estrogen mimic.
The procedure works, and works brilliantly. By 1990, George Smith at the University of Missouri used a specific kind of virus, a filamentous phage that infects bacteria. The phage is a strand of RNA that encodes proteins. Among these proteins is the coat protein that packages the head of the phage as part of an infective phage particle. George cloned random DNA sequences encoding random hexamer peptides into one end of the phage coat protein gene. Each phage then carried a diVerent, random DNA sequence in its coat protein gene, hence made a coat protein with a random six amino acid sequence at one end. The initial resulting “phage display” libraries had about twenty million of the sixty-four million diVerent possible hexamer peptides.
Rather than using the estrogen receptor and seeking a peptide estrogen mimic that binds the estrogen receptor, George Smith used a monoclonal antibody molecule as the analogue of the receptor and sought a hexamer peptide that could bind the monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibody technology allows the generation of a large number of identical antibody molecules, hence George could use these as identical mock receptors. George found that, among the twenty million diVerent phage, about one in a million would stick to his specific monoclonal antibody molecules. In fact, George found nineteen diVerent hexamers binding to his monoclonal antibody. Moreover, the nineteen diVerent hexamers diVered from one another, on average, in three of the six amino acid positions. All had high aYnity for his monoclonal antibody target. 
These results have been of very deep importance. Phage display is now a central part of drug discovery in many pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies. The discovery of “drug leads” is being transformed from a diYcult to a routine task. Not only is work being pursued using peptides but also using RNA and DNA sequences. Molecular diversity has now spread to the generation of high-diversity libraries of small organic molecules, an approach called “combinatorial chemistry.” The promise is of high medical importance. As we understand better the genetic diversity of the human population, we can hope to create well-crafted molecules with increased eYcacy as drugs, vaccines, enzymes, and novel molecular structures. When the capacity to craft such molecules is married, as it will be in the coming decades, to increased understanding of the genetic and cellular signaling pathways by which ontogeny is controlled, we will enter an era of “postgenomic” medicine. By learning to control gene regulation and cell signaling, we will begin to control cell proliferation, cell diVerentiation, and tissue regeneration to treat pathologies such as cancer, autoimmune diseases, and degenerative diseases.
But George Smith’s experiments are also of immediate interest, and in surprising ways that will bear on our later discussion of autonomous agents.
George’s experiments have begun to verify the concept of a “shape space” put forth by George Oster and Alan Perelson of the University of California, Berkeley, and Los Alamos National Laboratory more than a decade earlier. In turn, shape space suggests “catalytic task space.” We will need both to understand autonomous agents.
Oster and Perelson had been concerned about accounting for the fact that humans can make about a hundred million diVerent antibody molecules. Why, they wondered. They conceived of an abstract shape space with perhaps seven or eight “dimensions.” Three of these dimensions would correspond to the three spatial dimensions, length, height, and width of a molecular binding site. Other dimensions might correspond to physical properties of the binding sites of molecules, such as charge, dipole moment, and hydrophobicity.
A point in shape space would represent a molecular shape. An antibody binds its shape complement, key and lock. But the precision with which an antibody can recognize its shape complement is finite. Some jiggle room is allowed. So an antibody molecule “covers” a kind of “ball” of complementary shapes in shape space. And then comes the sweet argument. If an antibody covers a ball, an actual volume, in shape space, then a finite number of balls will suYce to cover all of shape space. A reasonable analogy is that a finite number of Ping-Pong balls will fill up a bedroom.
But how big of a Ping-Pong ball in shape space is covered by one antibody? Oster and Perelson reasoned that in order for an immune system to protect an organism against disease, its antibody repertoire should cover a reasonable fraction of shape space. Newts, with about ten thousand diVerent antibody molecules, have the minimal known antibody diversity. Perelson and Oster guessed that the newt repertoire must cover a substantial fraction, say about 1/e = where e is the natural base for logarithms = or 37 percent of shape space. Dividing 37 percent by 10,000 gives the fractional volume of shape space covered by one antibody molecule. It follows that 100,000,000 such balls, thrown at random into shape space and allowed to overlap one another, will saturate shape space. So, 100 million antibody molecules is all we need to recognize virtually any shape of the size scale of molecular binding sites.
And therefore the concept of shape space carries surprising implications. Not surprisingly, similar molecules can have similar shapes. More surprisingly, very diVerent molecules can have the same shape. Examples include endorphin and morphine. Endorphin is a peptide hormone. When endorphin binds the endorphin brain receptor, a euphoric state is induced. Morphine, a completely diVerent kind of organic molecule, binds the endorphin receptor as well, with well-known consequences. Still more surprising, a finite number of diVerent molecules, about a hundred million, can constitute a universal shape library. Thus, while there are vastly many diVerent proteins, the number of eVectively diVerent shapes may only be on the order of a hundred million.
If one molecule binding to a second molecule can be thought of as carrying out a “binding task,” then about a hundred million diVerent molecules may constitute a universal toolbox for all molecular binding tasks. So if we can now create libraries with 100 trillion diVerent proteins, a millionfold in excess of the universal library, we are in a position to begin to study molecular binding in earnest.
But there may also be a universal enzymatic toolbox. Enzymes catalyze, or speed up, chemical reactions. Consider a substrate molecule undergoing a reaction to a product molecule. Physical chemists think of the substrate and product molecules as lying in two potential “energy wells,” like a ball at the bottom of one of two adjacent bowls. A chemical reaction requires “lifting” the substrate energetically to the top of the barrier between the bowls. Physically, the substrate’s bonds are maximally strained and deformed at the top of this potential barrier. The deformed molecule is called the “transition state.” According to transition state theory, an enzyme works by binding to and stabilizing the transition state molecule, thereby lowering the potential barrier of the reaction. Since the probability that a molecule acquires enough energy to hop to the top of the potential barrier is exponentially less as the barrier height increases, the stabilization of the transition state by the enzyme can speed up the reaction by many orders of magnitude.
Think of a catalytic task space, in which a point represents a catalytic task, where a catalytic task is the binding of a transition state of a reaction. Just as similar molecules can have similar shapes, so too can similar reactions have similar transition states, hence, such reactions constitute similar catalytic tasks. Just as diVerent molecules can have the same shape, so too can diVerent reactions have similar transition states, hence constitute the “same” catalytic task. Just as an antibody can bind to and cover a ball of similar shapes, an enzyme can bind to and cover a ball of similar catalytic tasks. Just as a finite number of balls can cover shape space, a finite number of balls can cover catalytic task space.
In short, a universal enzymatic toolbox is possible. Clues that such a toolbox is experimentally feasible come from many recent developments, including the discovery that antibody molecules, evolved to bind molecular features called epitopes, can actually act as catalysts.
Catalytic antibodies are obtained exactly as one might expect, given the concept of a catalytic task space. One would like an antibody molecule that binds the transition state of a reaction. But transition states are ephemeral. Since they last only fractions of a second, one cannot immunize with a transition state itself. Instead, one immunizes with a stable analogue of the transition shape; that is, one immunizes with a second molecule that represents the “same” catalytic task as does the transition state itself. Antibody molecules binding to this transition state analogue are tested. Typically, about one in ten antibody molecules can function as at least a weak catalyst for the corresponding reaction.
These results even allow a crude estimate of the probability that a randomly chosen antibody molecule will catalyze a randomly chosen reaction. About one antibody in a hundred thousand can bind a randomly chosen epitope. About one in ten antibodies that bind the transition state analogue act as catalysts. By this crude calculation, about one in a million antibody molecules can catalyze a given reaction.
This rough calculation is probably too high by several orders of magnitude, even for antibody molecules. Recent experiments begin to address the probability that a randomly chosen peptide or DNA or RNA sequence will catalyze a randomly chosen reaction. The answer for DNA or RNA appears to be about one in a billion to one in a trillion. If we now make libraries of a hundred trillion random DNA, RNA, and protein molecules, we may already have in hand universal enzymatic toolboxes. Virtually any reaction, on the proper molecular scale of reasonable substrates and products, probably has one or more catalysts in such a universal toolbox.
In short, among the radical implications of molecular diversity is that we already possess hundreds of millions of diVerent molecular functions = binding, catalytic, structural, and otherwise.
In our hubris, we rival the biosphere.
In our humility, we can begin to formulate a general biology and begin to investigate the collective behaviors of hugely diverse molecular libraries. Among these collective behaviors must be life itself.
Life as an Emergent Collective Behavior of Complex Chemical Networks
In the summer of 1996, Philip Anderson, a Nobel laureate in physics, and I accompanied Dr. Henry MacDonald, incoming director of NASA, Ames, to NASA headquarters. Our purpose was to discuss a new linked experimental and theoretical approach to the origin-of-life problem with NASA Administrator Dan Golden and his colleague, Dr. Wesley Huntress. I was excited and delighted.
As long ago as 1971, I had published my own first foray into the origin-of-life problem as a young assistant professor in the Department of Theoretical Biology at the University of Chicago. I had wondered if life must be based on template replicating nucleic acids such as DNA or RNA double helices and found myself doubting that standard assumption. Life, at its core, depends upon autocatalysis, that is, reproduction. Most catalysis in cells is carried out by protein enzymes. Might there be general laws supporting the possibility that systems of catalytic polymers such as proteins might be self-reproducing? Proteins are, as noted, linear sequences of twenty kinds of standard amino acids. Consider, then, a first copy of a protein that has the capacity to catalyze a reaction by which two fragments of a potential second copy of that same protein might be ligated to make the second copy of the whole protein. Such a protein, A, say, thirty-two amino acids long, might act on two fragments, say, fifteen amino acids and seventeen amino acids in length, and ligate the two to make a second copy of the thirty-two amino acid sequence.
But if one could imagine a molecule, A, catalyzing its own formation from its own fragments, could one not imagine two proteins, A and B, having the property that A catalyzes the formation of B by ligating B’s fragments into a second copy of B, while B catalyzes the formation of A by catalyzing the ligation of A’s fragments into a second copy of A? Such a little reaction system would be collectively autocatalytic. Neither A alone, nor B alone, would catalyze its own formation. Rather the AB system would jointly catalyze its reproduction from A and B fragments. But if A and B might achieve collective autocatalysis, might one envision a system with tens or hundreds of proteins, or peptides, that were collectively autocatalytic?
Might collective autocatalysis of proteins or similar polymers be the basic source of self-reproduction in molecular systems? Or must life be based on template replication, as envisioned by Watson and Crick, or as envisioned even earlier by Schrödinger in his aperiodic solid with its microcode? In view of the potential for a general biology, what, in fact, are the alternative bases for self-reproducing molecular systems here and anywhere in the cosmos? Which of these alternatives is more probable, here and anywhere?
By 1971 I had asked and found a preliminary answer to the following question: In a complex mixture of diVerent proteins, where the proteins might be able to serve as candidates to ligate one another into still larger amino acid sequences, what are the chances that such a system will contain one or more collectively autocatalytic sets of molecules? In the next chapter I will discuss the current state of theory and experiment on this issue. The best current guess is that, as the molecular diversity of a reaction system increases, a critical threshold is reached at which collectively autocatalytic, self-reproducing chemical reaction networks emerge spontaneously.
If this view is correct, and the kinetic conditions for rapid reactions can be sustained, perhaps by enclosure of such a reproducing system in a bounding membrane vesicle, also synthesized by the system, the emergence of self-reproducing molecular systems may be highly probable. No small conclusion this: Life abundant, emergent, expected. Life spattered across megaparsecs, galaxies, galactic clusters. We as members of a creative, mysteriously unfolding universe. Moreover, the hypothesis is richly testable and, as described in the next chapter, is now under the early stages of testing.
One way or another, we will discover a second life = crouched under a Mars rock, frozen in time; limpid in some pool on Titan, in some test tube in Nebraska in the next few decades. We will discover a second life, one way or another.
What monumental transformations await us, proudly postmodern, mingled with peoples on this very globe still wedded to archetypes thousands of years old.
The Strange Thing About the Theory of Evolution
We do not understand evolution. We live it with moss, fruit, fin, and quill fellows. We see it since Darwin. We have insights of forms and their formation, won from eVorts since Aristotle codified the embryological investigations that over twenty-five centuries ago began with the study of deformed fetuses in sacrificial animals.
But we do not understand evolution.
“The strange thing about the theory of evolution,” said one of the Huxleys (although I cannot find which one), “is that everyone thinks he understands it.” How very well stated in that British fashion Americans can admire but not emulate. (“Two peoples separated by a common language,” as Churchill dryly put it.)
The strange thing about the theory of evolution is that everyone thinks he understands it. How very true. It seems, of course, so simple. Finches hop around the Galapagos, occasionally migrating from island to island. Small and large beaks serve for diVerent seeds. Beaks fitting seeds feed the young. Well-wrought beaks are selected. Mutations are the feedstock of heritable variation in a population. Populations evolve by mutation, mating, recombination, and selection to give the well-marked varieties that are, for Darwin, new species. Phylogenies bushy in the biosphere. “We’re here, we’re here,” cry all for their typical four-million-year-stay along the four-billion-year pageant.
“We’re here!”
But how?
How, in many senses. First, Darwin’s theory of evolution is a theory of descent with modification. It does not yet explain the genesis of forms, but the trimmings of the forms, once they are generated. “Rather like achieving an apple tree by trimming oV all the branches,” said a late-nineteenth-century skeptic.
How, in the most fundamental sense: Whence life in the first place? Darwin starts with life already here. Whence life is the stuV of all later questions about whence the forms to sift.
How, in still a diVerent sense. Darwin assumed gradualism. Most variation would be minor. Selection would sift these insensible alterations, a bit more lift, a little less drag, until the wing flew faultless in the high-hoped sky, a falcon’s knot-winged, claw-latching dive to dine.
But whence the gradualism itself? It is not God given, but true, that organisms are hardly aVected by most mutations. Most mutations do have little eVect, some have major eVects. In Drosophila, many mutants make small modifications in bristle number, color, shape. A few change wings to legs, eyes to antennae, heads to genitalia. Suppose that all mutations were of dramatic eVect. Suppose, to take the limiting philosophical case, that all mutations were what geneticists call “lethals.” Since, indeed, some mutations are lethals, one can, a priori, imagine creatures in which all mutations were lethal prior to having oVspring. Might be fine creatures, too, in the absence of any mutations, these evolutionary descendants of, well, of what? And progenitors of whom? No pathway to or from these luckless ones.
Thus, evolution must somehow be crafting the very capacity of creatures to evolve. Evolution nurtures herself! But not yet in Darwin’s theory, nor yet in ours.
Take another case = sex. Yes, it captures our attention, and the attention of most members of most species. Most species are sexual. But why bother? Asexuals, budding quietly wherever they bud, require only a single parent. We plumaged ones require two, a twofold loss in fitness.
Why sex? The typical answer, to which I adhere, is that sexual mating gives the opportunity for genetic recombination. In genetic recombination, the double chromosome complement sets, maternal and paternal homologues, pair up, break and recombine to yield oVspring chromosomes the left half of which derives from one parental chromosome, the right half of which derives from the other parental chromosome.
Recombination is said to be a useful “search procedure” in an evolving population. Consider, a geneticist would say, two genes, each with two versions, or alleles: A and a for the first gene, B and b for the second gene. Suppose A confers a selective advantage compared to a, and B confers an advantage with respect to b. In the absence of sex, mating, and recombination, a rabbit with A and b would have to wait for a mutation to convert b to B. That might take a long time. But, with mating and recombination, a rabbit with A on the left end of a maternal chromosome, and B on the right end of the homologous paternal chromosome might experience recombination. A and B would now be on a single chromosome, hence be passed on to the oVspring. Recombination, therefore, can be a lot faster than waiting for mutation to assemble the good, AB chromosome.
But it is not so obvious that recombination is a good idea after all. At the molecular level, the recombination procedure is rather like taking an airplane and a motorcycle, breaking both in half, and using spare bolts to attach the back half of the airplane to the front half of the motorcycle. The resulting contraption seems useless for any purpose. 
In short, the very usefulness of recombination depends upon the gradualness that Darwin assumed. In later chapters I will discuss the concept of a “fitness landscape.” The basic idea is simple. Consider a set of all possible frogs, each with a diVerent genotype. Locate each frog in a high-dimensional “genotype space,” each next to all genotypes that diVer from it by a single mutation. Imagine that you can measure the fitness of each frog. Graph the fitness of each frog as a height above that position in genotype space. The resulting heights form a fitness landscape over the genotype space, much as the Alps form a mountainous landscape over part of Europe.
In the fitness landscape, image, mutation, recombination, and selection can conspire to pull evolving populations upward toward the peaks of high fitness. But not always. It is relatively easy to show that recombination is only a useful search procedure on smooth fitness landscapes. The smoothness of a fitness landscape can be defined mathematically by a correlation function giving the similarity of fitnesses, or heights, at two points on the landscape separated by a mutational distance. In the Alps, most nearby points are of similar heights, except for cliVs, but points fifty kilometers apart can be of very diVerent heights. Fifty kilometers is beyond the correlation length of the Alps.
There is good evidence that recombination is only a useful search strategy on smooth, highly correlated landscapes, where the high peaks all cluster near one another. Recombination, half airplane–half motorcycle, is a means to look “between” two positions in a high-dimensional space. Then if both points are in the region of high peaks, looking between those two points is likely to uncover further new points of high fitness, or points on the slopes of even higher peaks. Thereafter, further mutation, recombination, and selection can bring the adapting population to successively higher peaks in the high-peaked region of the genotype space. If landscapes are very rugged and the high peaks do not cluster into smallish regions, recombination turns out to be a useless search strategy.
But most organisms are sexual. If organisms are sexual because recombination is a good search strategy, but recombination is only useful as a search strategy on certain classes of fitness landscapes, where did those fitness landscapes come from? No one knows.
The strange thing about evolution is that everyone thinks he understands it.
Somehow, evolution has brought forth the kind of smooth landscapes upon which recombination itself is a successful search strategy.
More generally, two young scientists, then at the Santa Fe Institute, proved a rather unsettling theorem. Bill Macready and David Wolpert called it the “no-free-lunch theorem.” They asked an innocent question. Are there some search procedures that are “good” search procedures, no matter what the problem is? To formalize this, Bill and David considered a mathematical convenience = a set of all possible fitness landscapes. To be simple and concrete, consider a large three-dimensional room. Divide the room into very small cubic volumes, perhaps a millimeter on a side. Let the number of these small volumes in the room be large, say a trillion. Now consider all possible ways of assigning integers between one and a trillion, to these small volumes. Any such assignment can be thought of as a fitness landscape, with the integer representing the fitness of that position in the room.
Next, formalize a search procedure as a process that somehow samples M distinct volumes among the trillion in the room. A search procedure specifies how to take the M samples. An example is a random search, choosing the M boxes at random. A second procedure starts at a box and samples its neighbors, climbing uphill via neighboring boxes toward higher integers. Still another procedure picks a box, samples neighbors and picks those with lower integers, then continues.
The no-free-lunch theorem says that, averaged over all possible fitness landscape, no search procedure outperforms any other search procedure. What? Averaged over all possible fitness landscapes, you would do as well trying to find a large integer by searching randomly from an initial box for your M samples as you would climbing sensibly uphill from your initial box.
The theorem is correct. In the absence of any knowledge, or constraint, on the fitness landscape, on average, any search procedure is as good as any other.
But life uses mutation, recombination, and selection. These search procedures seem to be working quite well. Your typical bat or butterfly has managed to get itself evolved and seems a rather impressive entity. The no-free-lunch theorem brings into high relief the puzzle. If mutation, recombination, and selection only work well on certain kinds of fitness landscapes, yet most organisms are sexual, and hence use recombination, and all organisms use mutation as a search mechanism, where did these well-wrought fitness landscapes come from, such that evolution manages to produce the fancy stuV around us?
Here, I think, is how. Think of an organism’s niche as a way of making a living. Call a way of making a living a “natural game.” Then, of course, natural games evolve with the organisms making those livings during the past four billion years. What, then, are the “winning games”? Naturally, the winning games are the games the winning organisms play. One can almost see Darwin nod. But what games are those? What games are the games the winners play?
Ways of making a living, natural games, that are well searched out and well mastered by the evolutionary search strategies of organisms, namely, mutation and recombination, will be precisely the niches, or ways of making a living, that a diversifying and speciating population of organisms will manage to master. The ways of making a living presenting fitness landscapes that can be well searched by the procedures that organisms have in hand will be the very ways of making a living that readily come into existence. If there were a way of making a living that could not be well explored and exploited by organisms as they speciate, that way of making a living would not become populated. Good jobs, like successful jobholders, prosper.
So organisms, niches, and search procedures jointly and self-consistently coconstruct one another! We make the world in which we make a living such that we can, and have, more or less mastered that evolving world as we make it. The same is true, I will argue, for an econosphere. A web of economic activities, firms, tasks, jobs, workers, skills, and learning, self-consistently came into existence in the last forty thousand years of human evolution.
The strange thing about the theory of evolution is that everyone thinks he understands it. But we do not. A biosphere, or an econosphere, self-consistently coconstructs itself according to principles we do not yet fathom.
Laws for a Biosphere
But there must be principles. Think of the Magna Carta, that cultural enterprise founded on a green meadow in England when John I was confronted by his nobles. British common law has evolved by precedent and determinations to a tangled web of more-or-less wisdom. When a judge makes a new determination, sets a new precedent, ripples of new interpretation pass to near and occasionally far reaches of the law. Were it the case that every new precedent altered the interpretation of all old judgments, the common law could not have coevolved into its rich tapestry. Conversely, if new precedents never sent out ripples, the common law could hardly evolve at all.
There must be principles of coevolutionary assembly for biospheres, economic systems, legal systems. Coevolutionary assembly must involve coevolving organizations flexible enough to change but firm enough to resist change. Edmund Burke was basically right. Might there be something deep here? Some hint of a law of coevolutionary assembly?
Perhaps. I begin with the simple example oVered by Per Bak and his colleagues some years ago = Bak’s “sand pile” and “self-organized criticality.” The experiment requires a table and some sand. Drop the sand slowly on the table. The sand gradually piles up, fills the tabletop, piles to the rest angle of sand, then sand avalanches begin to fall to the floor.
Keep adding sand slowly to the sand pile and plot the size distribution of sand avalanches. You will obtain many small avalanches and progressively fewer large avalanches. In fact, you will achieve a characteristic size distribution called a “power law.” Power law distributions are easily seen if one plots the logarithm of the number of avalanches at a given size on the y-axis, and the logarithm of the size of the avalanche on the x-axis. In the sand pile case, a straight line sloping downward to the right is obtained. The slope is the power law relation between the size and number of avalanches.
Bak and his friends called their sand pile “self-organized critical.” Here, “critical” means that avalanches occur on all length scales, “self-organized” means that the system tunes itself to this critical state.
Many of us have now explored the application of Bak’s ideas in models of coevolution that I will discuss shortly. With caveats that other explanations may account for the data, the general result is that something may occur that is like a theory of coevolutionary assembly that yields a self-organized critical biosphere with a power law distribution of small and large avalanches of extinction and speciation events. As we shall see, the best data now suggest that precisely such a power law distribution of extinction and speciation events has occurred over the past 650 million years of the Phanerozoic. In addition, the same body of theory predicts that most species go extinct soon after their formation, while some live a long time. The predicted species lifetime distribution is a power law. So too are the data. 
Similar phenomena may occur in an econosphere. Small and large avalanches of extinction and speciation events occur in our technologies. A colleague, Brian Arthur, is fond of pointing out that when the car came in, the horse, buggy, buggy whip, saddlery, smithy, and Pony Express went out of business. The car paved the way for an oil and gas industry, paved roads, motels, fast-food restaurants, and suburbia. The Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter wrote about this kind of turbulence in capitalist economies. These Schumpeterian gales of creative destruction appear to occur in small and large avalanches. Perhaps the avalanches arise in power laws. And, like species, most firms die young; some make it to old age = Storre, in Sweden, is over nine hundred years old. The distribution of firm lifetimes is again a power law.
Here are hints = common law, ecosystems, economic systems = that general principles govern the coevolutionary coconstruction of lives and livings, organisms and natural games, firms and economic opportunities. Perhaps such a law governs any biosphere anywhere in the cosmos.
I shall suggest other candidate laws for any biosphere in the course of Investigations. As autonomous agents coconstruct a biosphere, each must manage to categorize and act upon its world in its own behalf. What principles might govern that categorization and action, one might begin to wonder. I suspect that autonomous agents coevolve such that each makes the maximum diversity of reliable discriminations upon which it can act reliably as it swims, scrambles, pokes, twists, and pounces. This simple view leads to a working hypothesis: Communities of agents will coevolve to an “edge of chaos” between overrigid and overfluid behavior. The working hypothesis is richly testable today using, for example, microbial communities.
Moreover, autonomous agents forever push their way into novelty = molecular, morphological, behavioral, organizational. I will formalize this push into novelty as the mathematical concept of an “adjacent possible,” persistently explored in a universe that can never, in the vastly many lifetimes of the universe, have made all possible protein sequences even once, bacterial species even once, or legal systems even once. Our universe is vastly nonrepeating; or, as the physicists say, the universe is vastly nonergodic. Perhaps there are laws that govern this nonergodic flow. I will suggest that a biosphere gates its way into the adjacent possible at just that rate at which its inhabitants can just manage to make a living, just poised so that selection sifts out useless variations slightly faster than those variations arise. We ourselves, in our biosphere, econosphere, and technosphere, gate our rate of discovery. There may be hints here too of a general law for any biosphere, a hoped-for new law for self-constructing systems of autonomous agents. Biospheres, on average, may enter their adjacent possible as rapidly as they can sustain; so too may econospheres. Then the hoped-for fourth law of thermodynamics for such self-constructing systems will be that they tend to maximize their dimensionality, the number of types of events that can happen next.
And astonishingly, we need stories. If, as I will suggest, we cannot prestate the configuration space, variables, laws, initial and boundary conditions of a biosphere, if we cannot foretell a biosphere, we can, nevertheless, tell the stories as it unfolds. Biospheres demand their Shakespeares as well as their Newtons. We will have to rethink what science is itself. And C. P. Snow’s “two cultures,” the humanities and science may find an unexpected, inevitable union.
Investigations leads us to new views of the biosphere as a coconstructing system. In the final chapter, I step beyond the central concern with autonomous agents to consider the universe itself. Again, there are hints of coconstruction = of the laws themselves, of the complexity of the universe, of geometry itself. The epilogue concludes with limits to reductionism in its strong form and an invocation to a constructivist science.





Chapter 3
Autonomous Agents
Some wellspring of creation, lithe in the scattered sunlight of an early planet, whispered something to the gods, who whispered back, and the mystery came alive. Agency was spawned. With it, the nature of the universe changed, for some new union of matter, energy, information, and something more could reach out and manipulate the world on its own behalf. Selfish? Yes. But how does matter, energy, information, and something else miraculous become selfish? From that miracle grew a biosphere = and, we must surmise, from that grow other biospheres, scattered seeds and gardens across the cosmos.
Pregnant in the birth of the universe was the birth of life. Agency may be coextensive with life. Life certainly burgeons nowhere without agency. We all act on our own behalf. In the Kantian form: What must something be such that it can act on its own behalf?
I will hazard again my tentative answer, baldly now, then return to it: An autonomous agent must be an autocatalytic system able to reproduce and able to perform one or more thermodynamic work cycles.
The thrashing E. coli swimming upstream in a glucose gradient is an autocatalytic system able to reproduce. In its swimming, it is carrying out one or more thermodynamic work cycles. Can I deduce this tentative definition from some more primary categories? I do not know how. At the beginning, I jumped = more realistically, I struggled = for weeks searching for a constellation of properties that seemed promising, in order to articulate something I sensed but could not yet say. It has taken four more years to understand more of what I still can only partially say in these investigations.
Definitional Jumps and Circles
What of definitional jumps in science? 
So a pause to look at such jumps, to new clusters of concepts that, whole cloth, change how we carve up the world. Consider Isaac Newton and his famous F = MA, force is equal to mass times acceleration. It all seems sensible. If a log lies on an iced pond and I push it, it accelerates. If I push harder, it accelerates faster. If there are two logs, one on top of the other, and I push, the two accelerate less rapidly than if there were one log.
“I make no hypotheses,” stated Newton. Yet Poincaré, two centuries later, argued that Newton’s brilliant move was definitional. The three terms, F, M, and A = force, mass, and acceleration = argued Poincaré, admit no independent definitions. Acceleration is independently definable by the metric concepts of distance, motion, time, the rate of change of position with time = velocity, and the rate change of velocity with time = acceleration. But force and mass are, said Poincaré, joined at the hip, codefined, one in terms of the other. Mass is that which resists acceleration by force. Force is that which induces acceleration when applied to a mass. 
The equation F = MA is a definitional circle, according to Poincaré. Many physicists disagree with Poincaré. I tend to agree, but then I am not a physicist, so take care.
On the other hand, the great twentieth-century philosopher Ludwig Witt-gen-stein said something similar in his majestic Philosophical Investigations. Witt-genstein came to his revolutionary investigations painfully, ultimately rejecting his own earlier triumph in the Tractatus. Indeed, part of why I have so blatantly borrowed Wittgenstein’s title, without my presumption to similar intellectual stature, is that there is a parallel between Wittgenstein’s abandonment of the Tractatus and growing awareness of knowing as living a language game, and a central theme of this Investigations, that there may be a limit to the way Newton taught us to do science and a need to reformulate what we do when we and other agents get on with living a life. As we will see, in both cases, it appears that something profound is going on in the universe that is not finitely prestatable. Life and language games seem persistently open to radical innovations that cannot be deduced from previous categories and concepts. I will only be able to discuss these issues more fully after we have encountered autonomous agents and their unfolding mysteries.
In his early Tractatus, Wittgenstein had brought to conclusion the mandate of logical atomism from Russell. Logical atomism sought a firm epistemological foundation for all knowledge in terms of privileged “atomic statements” about “sense data.” The idea, flowing from Hume to Berkeley to Kant then back to British empiricism, was the following: One might be mistaken in saying that a chair is in the room, but one could hardly be mistaken in reporting bits and pieces of one’s own awareness. For example, “I am having the experience of a brown color”; “I am aware of the note A-flat.” These statements were thought to record sense data and to be less susceptible to error than statements about the “external world” of chairs, rocks, and legal systems. Logical atomism sought to reconstruct statements about the external world from logical combinations of atomic statements about sense data. The Tractatus sought to bring that program to fruition   .   .   .    and nearly succeeded.
It was Wittgenstein himself who, twenty years later, junked the entire enterprise. Philosophical Investigations was his later-life revolution. His revolution has done much to destroy the concept of a privileged level of description and paved the way to an understanding that concepts at any level typically are formed in codefi-nitional circles. Newton was just ahead of his time.
You see, even in the case of the physical chair, the idea that we can reconstruct statements about chairs as equivalent to combinations of statements about sense data fails. The failure is deep and will have unfolding resonances with the mysteries of autonomous agents. The program to replace statements about physical objects with sets of statements about sense data requires “logical equivalence.” Logical equivalence means that wherever a statement about a chair occurs at a “higher level” of description, it must be possible to specify a list of statements about sense data whose truth are jointly necessary and suYcient for the statement about the chair to be true. For example, the statement, “There is a Windsor rocker in the living room,” must be implied by, “I seem to be seeing a brown surface with a given shape,” “I feel a hard surface,” and also, “When I push the top of the shape, I observe an oscillatory motion of the brown surface.”
The trouble is, it appears to be impossible to finitely prespecify a set of statements about sense data whose truth is logically equivalent to statements about chairs. What if the observer were colorblind, or blind, or deaf, or not in the room but might enter the room wearing hobnailed boots, fall on the chair, and break it? Could we finitely specify the list, “If I were to enter the room, I would have the following sense data; and if one who is red-green colorblind were to enter the room he or she would have the following sense data; and if the rocker were to be on a soft rug, the sounds that would be heard by one who is A-flat tone deaf would   .   .   .   . To achieve this end, we would have to be able to finitely prespecify something about a set of statements concerning atomic sense data statements whose truth would be necessary and suYcient to the truth of a statement about the Windsor chair in the living room.
The problem, briefly, is that there appears to be no finitely prestatable set of conditions about sense data statements whose truth is logically equivalent to any statement about a real physical chair in a living room.
Wittgenstein invented the concept of a “language game,” a codefined cluster of concepts that carve up the world in some new way. Consider, he said, legal language, and try translating it to ordinary statements about human agents without using legal concepts. So consider, “The jury found Henderson guilty of murder.” We understand this statement but do so in the context of law, evidence, legal responsibility, trials, guilt and innocence, jury systems, bribing jury members, appeal processes, and so forth. Now try to translate the statement into a set of statements about ordinary human actions, “A group of twelve people were seated behind a wooden enclosure for several days. People talked about someone having died of poison. One day, the twelve people left the room and went to another room and talked about what had happened. Then the twelve people came back and one man stood up and uttered the words, ‘We find Henderson guilty of murder.’”
There is no finitely prespecifiable list of statements about ordinary human actions whose truth would be necessary and suYcient for the truth of the statement that the jury found Henderson guilty of murder.
Another example concerns the United Kingdom going to war with Germany. There is no finitely prespecifiable set of ways this must happen. Thus, the queen, one day after tea, might betake herself to Parliament and cry, “We are at war with Germany!” Or the prime minister might in Parliament say, “Members, by the authority of my oYce I declare that we are at war with Germany!” Or ten thousand irate football fans from Leeds might shoulder picks, take to barges, funnel in fury up the Rhine, and attack football fans in Koblenz. Or   .   .   .   . In short, there is no prestatable set of necessary and suYcient conditions about the actions of individual humans for the United Kingdom to manage to go to war with Germany. (And may neither nation again find a way to make war on the other in the future.)
Wittgenstein’s point is that one cannot, in general, reduce statements at a higher level to a finitely specified set of necessary and suYcient statements at a lower level. Instead, the concepts at the higher level are codefined. We understand “guilty of murder” within the legal language game and thus in terms of a codefining cluster of concepts concerning the features noted above = law, legal responsibility, evidence, trial, jury.
Useful new concepts arise in codefining clusters. It is fine that F = MA is circular, Poincaré might say, for the codefining circle is at the center of a wider web of concepts, many of which have reference to the world; hence, the web of concepts touches, articulates, discriminates, and categorizes the world.
So too did Darwin jump to a new definitional circle with his concept of natural selection, heritable variation, and fitness. Many have worried that natural selection and fitness, which is defined as an increased expected number of oVspring, are a definitional circle. Like F = MA, the definitional circle is virtuous.
So too I jump to the tentative definition, “An autonomous agent is a system able to reproduce itself and carry out one or more thermodynamic work cycles.” Actually, at this stage my own tentative definition is not circular because “reproduce itself” and “work cycle” are definable independently. But as we delve further into the concept of an autonomous agent in succeeding chapters, cyclic definitions arise concerning “work,” “propagating work,” “constraints,” “propagating organization,” “task.” I hope that the circle is virtuous and brings us toward a new understanding of “organization” itself.
In short, unpacking this definition will lead us into odd territory. Part of the oddness is the question of just what is the proper mathematical form to describe an autonomous agent. Is it a number, hence, a scalar? A list of numbers, hence, a vector? A tensor? I think not. An autonomous agent is a relational concept. In a later chapter I will suggest a spare mathematical form for an agent derived from category theory. This attempt is better than nothing, but I am not persuaded that eVort is satisfactory, for the mathematical mappings of category theory are themselves finitely prestatable and a biosphere, I both fear and celebrate, is not. Somethings new are needed.
Autonomous Agents
Well, let’s have at it. I begin with the cornerstone of thermodynamics, the Carnot cycle.
Sadi Carnot was a French engineer writing in the 1830s. The French had recently lost the Napoleonic Wars, Waterloo had come and gone, a certain famous statue to Wellington had been erected in London. Carnot, like others at the time, realized that part of the success achieved by the English had to do with early industrial economic power. The Brits had large numbers of steam pumps that were able to clear water from coal and iron mines, allowing miners to work under bad but relatively dry conditions and extract coal and iron more eVectively than could their French counterparts. The coal and iron in turn were worked into the machinery of the Industrial Revolution and cannons and also, notably, more steam pumps that could keep the mines in working condition. I find it fascinating that the British system was an autocatalytic technology, iron and coal fueled the manufacture of pumps that abetted the mining of iron and coal.
Carnot set about understanding the fundamentals of the extraction of mechanical work from thermal energy sources. The result of his eVort was an analysis of an idealized device to extract mechanical work from heat, the Carnot cycle. Carnot titled his work “An Investigation on the Motive Force of Heat.”
A second point of fascination is that Carnot carried out his crucial analysis just as steam was becoming established as a source of mechanical work. It is almost certainly not a coincidence that the impulse to investigate the central nature of autonomous agents arises just as we are on the threshold of creating such molecular systems. Science, technology, and art tumble into the adjacent possible in roughly equal and yoked pace.
Figure 3.1 shows the essentials of Carnot’s idealized machine. There are two heat reservoirs, one hotter than the other, T1 > T2. Between the two heat reservoirs is a cylinder with a piston inside. The space between the top of the piston and the head of the cylinder is filled with an idealized “working gas,” which can be compressed and can expand. As a real, and certainly an idealized, gas is compressed, the gas becomes hotter; as the gas expands, it becomes cooler.
I will modify the Carnot machine in one central way, which does not alter but rather makes explicit an important feature of the actual working of the Carnot machine. I will attach a red handle to the cylinder, as shown in Figure 3.1. The Carnot cycle begins with the piston pressed up near the top of the cylinder, the working gas is compressed and hot, indeed, it is as hot as the high temperature T1. You will operate the machine. You pull on the red handle, sliding the cylinder (frictionlessly) into contact with the high-temperature reservoir, T1. You then let go of the red handle and allow the working gas in the cylinder to expand, thereby pushing the piston downward away from the head of the cylinder, in the first part of the power stroke of the Carnot engine.
As the power stroke initiates, the working gas expands and starts to cool. However, thanks to the fact that the cylinder is now in contact with the hot thermal reservoir, heat flows into the cylinder from T1 and maintains the working gas almost at the constant temperature T1. Indeed, if the Carnot engine is operated slowly enough, the temperature remains constant. Such slow operation is said to be reversible. If the engine is operated more rapidly, hence irreversibly, the temperature is held nearly constant during this part of the power stroke, thus this section of the power stroke is called the “isothermal expansion portion” of the Carnot work cycle.
It is not only convenient but central to understanding a Carnot engine to plot the state of the system in a Cartesian coordinate system in which the x-axis corresponds to the volume of the working gas, while the y-axis corresponds to the pressure of the gas (Figure 3.2). The work cycle began with the piston near the top of the cylinder, the working gas hot and compressed. As the isothermal expansion phase of the power stroke happens, the pressure falls slightly, while the volume increases appreciably. The corresponding segment of the work cycle connects the starting position in Figure 3.2, position 1, to position 2 by a line segment representing the simultaneous values of volume and pressure during the isothermal expansion part of the power stroke.
You initiate the second part of the power stroke by pushing on the handle and moving the cylinder out of contact with the hot T1 reservoir to a position between the two heat reservoirs, touching neither. You immediately let go of the handle. The working gas continues to expand, pushing downward on the piston and moving it away from the head of the cylinder. However, because the cylinder is out of contact with T1 and the working gas is expanding, the working gas gets noticeably cooler, so pressure drops appreciably while volume increases slightly. This part of the power stroke is called “adiabatic expansion.” In Figure 3.2, the adiabatic expansion step carries the system from step 2 to step 3, the end of the power stroke, a point where the pressure is at the lowest point, and the volume of the working gas is at the highest point of the work cycle.
Now in order to return the Carnot engine to its initial state, 1 (in Figure 3.2), such that the working gas can again expand and do mechanical work on the piston, work must be done on the engine to bring the piston back up to its position near the head of the cylinder and to recompress and reheat the working gas so that its temperature and pressure values, or state, correspond to state 1. If the work done on the Carnot engine simply retraced the exact pathway from step 3 to step 2 to step 1, at least as much work would have to be done on the Carnot engine as the engine released in the power stroke in going from 1 to 2 to 3. If so, no net work would be carried out by the Carnot engine on the external world.
Instead of retracing the power stroke pathway, the Carnot engine, and all heat engines, use a simple trick. You will do it. At step 3, the end of the power stroke, you push on the handle, pushing the cylinder into contact with the low-temperature reservoir, T2. Indeed, you have arranged things such that at the end of the power stroke the working gas is itself at this lower temperature, T2.
With the cylinder in contact with T2, you now run around to the base of the cylinder, where a stout handle is attached to the piston and extends beyond the cylinder’s base. You push on the handle, pushing the piston upward in the cylinder, thereby compressing the working gas. As you do this work on the piston, the compressing gas tends to heat up. But thanks to contact with the low-temperature reservoir, the heat generated by compression in the working gas diVuses into the cool T2 reservoir, holding the working gas only slightly warmer than T2. Thus volume decreases appreciably, while pressure increases slightly.
The point of this trick is that it requires less work to compress a gas that remains cool than one that heats up. Because the working gas is held at nearly a constant temperature T2, this part of the compression stroke is called “isothermal compression,” and it carries the system in its volume-pressure state space from position 3 to position 4 in Figure 3.2.
At the end of the isothermal compression stroke, you do your part again. You pull on the handle, pulling the cylinder out of contact with the cool T2 reservoir to a position between T2 and T1, touching neither. Then you return to push on the handle connected to the piston, further compressing the working gas. Due to the compression of the working gas and the fact that it is not in contact with the cool T1 reservoir, the working gas heats up, so the pressure increases appreciably while the volume decreases slightly, as the gas is compressed until the initial state of hot compressed gas, step 1, is achieved. The work cycle is now complete. The connected set of four lines in Figure 3.2, from step 1 to 2 to 3 to 4 to 1, depicts the sequence of pressure volume states of the working gas around the work cycle.
I have emphasized the role of you and the red handle in carrying us through the work cycle. In a real engine, of course, the role of the red handle is carried out by various gears, rods, escapements, and other mechanical devices that serve an essential role: The handle and you, or the gears, rods, and escapements, literally organize the flow of the recurrent process. I will return to this organization of the flow of process in a machine or an autonomous agent. The Carnot cycle is involved with the organized release of thermal energy in achieving recurrent mechanical work. The organization of work is essential = and will be central = to thinking about what occurs in an autonomous agent. Indeed, part of what we need is a way of characterizing the organization of real processes in the nonequilibrium world. I do not think we have, as yet, an adequate concept of organization.
The first question I want to raise about the Carnot cycle is this: Why is it a “cycle”? There is a clear sensible answer. The Carnot cycle operates in a cycle, as does a steam engine, gasoline engine, or electric motor, precisely because at the completion of one cycle the total system is returned to the same initial state as at the start of the cycle. Because of this, the organization of the process, achieved by the actual gears, rods, and escapements that coordinate the relative motion of the parts of the engine, has returned to the initial configuration from which, with no further ado, the system can again perform a work cycle. Thus in the case of the Carnot engine, the system performs mechanical work on the piston in a work cycle that, in net, transfers heat from the hot reservoir to the cold reservoir. At the end of the cycle, the Carnot engine returns to the initial state with the piston raised and filled with hot compressed gas at the temperature of the hot reservoir. The Carnot engine is all set as a total organization to receive another input of heat energy and perform another work cycle.
Suppose that there were no cycle? For example, a cannon fires a cannonball that hits a standing steel beam that is knocked over and hits a lever arm tossing a ball on its opposite end into the air which then falls to the ground and stops. To get the contraption to do it again would require that somehow the cannon be reloaded, the steel beam be reset on end, the lever arm to be reset with a ball on its other end. Where is all this organization of processes and events to come from? I will return to these issues in the next chapter, but notice for now that the cyclic organization of processes in the Carnot, the steam, the gas, and the electric engines achieve the requisite organization precisely because the system works as a cyclic process. 
A second issue concerns a well-known feature of the Carnot engine that is very much worth comment here. If the sequence of steps is run in the reverse directions, so that the engine is run from state 1 to 4 to 3 to 2 to 1, the Carnot engine is not performing as a pump at all. It is, instead, performing as a refrigerator. Run in the reverse direction, the Carnot engine uses mechanical work to pump heat from the cool reservoir, T2, to the hot reservoir, T1, making T2 cooler.
Now, heat does not spontaneously flow from cooler to hotter objects, making the cooler objects even cooler. So two points leap to attention here. First, the same device, the Carnot engine, can be a pump or be a refrigerator, depending upon the order of the operations. In fact, I am cheating a bit, for the organization of gears and escapements would diVer in achieving the sequence of states 1, 2, 3, 4, 1 versus 1, 4, 3, 2, 1. But essentially the same machine can perform two very diVerent functions, or tasks, pumping in one case, cooling in the other.
The third point, of course, concerns spontaneous processes and nonspontaneous processes. It took more than fifty years from Carnot’s work to really begin to understand thermodynamics = the first law, conservation of energy; the famous and mysterious second law and its handmaiden, entropy; the third law concerning a zero temperature at which molecular motions stop = and for the invention of statistical mechanics to connect thermodynamics and Newtonian mechanics.
Some processes occur spontaneously, some conceivable processes do not. One of the most obvious cases is that if a hot gas is in contact with a cold gas, the two will in due course come to be the same temperature. Heat spontaneously “diVuses” from the hot to the cold object, cooling the former, warming the latter. In statistical mechanics we think of “hot” as corresponding to atoms moving rapidly, hence, with high kinetic energy. When these high-kinetic-energy atoms interact with slower-moving sets of atoms, the collisions transfer kinetic energy to the slower-moving atoms, speeding them up and slowing down the faster-moving atoms. Eventually, the atoms in the two sets come to have the same statistical distribution of motions, hence kinetic energy and hence temperature, where “temperature” is now understood to correspond to the average kinetic energy of the particles in the system.
The apparently mysterious second law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of a system is either constant or increases. The modern understanding of entropy can be stated roughly with the help of the concept of a 6N-dimensional phase space. 
Consider an isolated closed thermodynamic system, say, an ideal gas in a thermos bottle. Let there be N gas particles in the bottle. Now, each particle is in motion in real three-dimensional space; therefore, we can pick an arbitrary three-dimensional coordinate system, with length, width, and height (x, y, and z). We can note the current position of any particular particle in the bottle at any moment on each of the three positional coordinates. In addition to having a position, each particle may be in motion, it may have a velocity and an associated momentum in some direction in the bottle. Using Newton’s vectorial composition of forces rules, we can decompose the motion of the real particle into its motions in the x direction, the y direction, and the z direction. The momentum in each of these directions is just the mass of the particle times its velocity in that direction. Newton’s vector composition rule says that we can recover the motion of the initial particle by constructing the obvious parallelogram that adds the x, y, and z velocity or momentum vectors back together.
So for each particle we can represent its position and momentum in three spatial directions by 6 numbers. We have N particles in the bottle, so we can represent the current positions and momenta of all N particles at any instant in time by 6N numbers. DiVerent combinations of positions and velocities now correspond to diVerent sets of 6N numbers. And, as the N particles in the bottle collide and exchange momenta, bouncing oV in new combinations of directions with new combinations of velocities according to Newton’s three laws of motion, the 6N numbers representing the system at each moment change in time through some succession of 6N numbers. If we think of all the possible values of the positions and velocities of the N particles in the bottle, that set of possible values is the 6N-dimensional phase space of our system. The system starts at some single combination of 6N numbers, hence a single state in the phase space. Over time, as positions and momenta change, the 6N numbers change and the system flows along a trajectory in phase space.
Now here is the heart of the second law: Some of the positions in the 6N-dimensional phase space correspond to states in which all the particles are more or less uniformly spread throughout the bottle and are moving with more or less the same velocities. Other positions in the 6N-dimensional phase space correspond to unusual situations, in which all the particles are located near the top of the bottle, are along the walls of the bottle, are moving in the same direction in the bottle, and so forth.
Consider mathematically breaking up the 6N-dimensional phase space into a very large number of tiny 6N-dimensional “cubes” that together add up to the entire 6N-dimensional phase space. If the cubes are small enough, then each cube corresponds to a quite similar set of states. One cube might correspond to all the particles flowing downward in the bottle, another cube might correspond to a near uniform distribution of positions and momenta.
It is easy to see intuitively that there are many more combinations of positions and momenta that correspond to nearly uniform positions of the particles and their motions scattered in all possible directions than there are combinations of positions and momenta that correspond to all the particles being located in a specific small region of the bottle. In order to quantify this intuition, statistical mechanics counts the numbers of small 6N-dimensional cubes corresponding to each such “macroscopic” state of the gas. Vastly many more small cubes correspond to the “macrostate” in which particles are nearly uniformly distributed and are moving in all the possible directions with velocities bunched around an average velocity = hence kinetic energy = than for any other macrostate, such as the macrostate corresponding to all the particles being located near the top of the bottle.
We are almost home free. We need one more premise = the famous “ergodic hypothesis.” This hypothesis asserts that the trajectory of states leading from the initial state in a long stringlike “walk” will, over time, spend as much time in any small 6N cube as in any other cube. In short, the ergodic hypothesis asserts = indeed, assumes = that the system will wander around its phase space such that after a long time it will have spent as large a fraction of its time in any one tiny cube as any other cube.
But now we are home free. Since vastly many more small cubes correspond to the nearly uniform distribution of particles, moving in all possible directions but bunched around an average velocity, it follows from the ergodic hypothesis that the system will have spent most of its time in this “equilibrium” macrostate.
The second law, in its modern understanding, is simply the statement that an isolated thermodynamic system will tend to flow away from improbable macrostates = corresponding to very few of our tiny 6N-dimensional cubes = and flow into and spend most of its time in the equilibrium macrostate for no better reason than that that macrostate corresponds to vastly many small 6N cubes in the entire 6N-dimensional phase space. The increase of entropy in the second law is nothing but the tendency of systems to flow from less probable to more probable macrostates.
The physical concept of entropy of a macrostate is understood, since Ludwig Boltzmann in the last century, to be proportional to the logarithm of the number of small 6N-dimensional cubes that correspond to that macrostate. The increase of entropy in spontaneous processes is then the tendency to flow from macrostates comprised of a small numbers of 6N-dimensional cubes, or “microstates,” to macrostates comprised of a very many microstates.
Our next step in thinking about autonomous agents requires us to consider again the concept of a “catalytic task space” and the character of autocatalytic sets in the context of catalytic task space. In the first chapter I described the basic framework, due to Alan Perelson and George Oster, of an abstract shape space, where each point would represent a molecular shape. Shape space has at least the three spatial dimensions of length, height, and width, but in addition it has properties reflecting the features of clusters of atoms that contribute to an eVective molecular shape, that is, to those features that collectively might be “recognized” by another molecule that bound the shape in question. Such additional molecular features may include electric charge, dipole moment, hydrophobicity, or other features. At present, it is a reasonable guess that shape space is between five and seven dimensional. If true, this would not mean that there are five familiar features, three spatial and two others, that constitute the dimensions of shape space. Rather, some odd combination of several physical properties = partially charge, partially dipole moment, or partially hydrophobicity and partially dipole moment = might be the dimensions that matter.
In any case, we are to consider a bounded shape space with maximum and minimum values for each axis. A shape is a point in shape space. Thus, a molecular feature on a virus antigen, an epitope, is a point in shape space. An antibody might bind that epitope and a family of similar shapes filling a ball in shape space. As remarked above, very diVerent molecules can have eVectively the same shape, so endorphin and morphine both bind the same endorphin receptor. A finite number of balls will “cover” shape space, and the immune repertoire of perhaps a hundred million antibodies may well cover shape space.
Catalytic task space, you recall, simply applied the concept of shape space to catalysis. A point in catalytic task space now represents a catalytic task. A given chemical reaction constitutes a catalytic task. As in shape space, similar reactions constitute similar catalytic tasks. As in shape space, diVerent reactions can constitute essentially the same catalytic task. An enzyme covers some ball in catalytic task space, comprising the set of reactions it can catalyze. And as noted before, according to transition state theory a catalytic task corresponds to a catalyst binding the distorted, hence high-energy, molecular configuration corresponding to the transition state of a reaction with high aYnity and binding the substrate and product states with, in general, lower aYnity.
In terms of catalytic task space, what is a collectively autocatalytic set? Consider a simple case. Two peptides, A and B, form a collectively autocatalytic set if A catalyzes the formation of B from two of B’s fragments, while B catalyzes A from two of A’s fragments. Then consider two balls in catalytic task space, the first ball, covered by A, constitutes the catalytic task in which two fragments of B are ligated to form B. The second ball, covered by B, constitutes the catalytic task in task space in which two fragments of A are ligated to form A.
The first feature of a collectively autocatalytic set is what I call “catalytic closure.” Every reaction that must find a catalyst, does find a catalyst. The formation of A requires B, and the formation of B requires A. It is important to notice that this closure in catalytic task space is not “local”; there is no single reaction in this collectively autocatalytic set that by itself constitutes the closure in question. In a clear sense, the catalytic closure is a property of the whole system.
A second feature to notice is that A and B as catalysts do not by themselves constitute the closure in question; A and B might catalyze a variety of reactions. In particular, if B is presented with the two “proper” fragments of A, call them A’ and A”, then B will ligate A’ and A’’ to form A. But if B were presented with other substrates, say Q and R, then B might catalyze a reaction transforming Q and R into two other molecular species, S and T. Similarly, A, as a catalyst, will ligate two proper fragments of B, B’ and B’’ to form B. But A, if confronted with two other substrates, say, F and G, might catalyze their ligation to form a single third molecule, H.
While the set A, B, A’, A”, B’, B’’ is collectively autocatalytic, forming more A and B from a substrate pool of A’, A”, B’, and B”, it is not the case that the set A, B, Q, R, F, and G is collectively autocatalytic, for the products of the reactions catalyzed by A and B, namely S, T, and H, are not themselves the catalysts A and B.
In short, the closure of catalytic tasks requires specification of the catalytic tasks themselves plus the specific substrates whose products, here A and B, constitute the very catalysts that carry out the catalytic tasks in question.
The closure of an autocatalytic set and set of catalytic tasks has a kind of dualism. From the point of view of the molecules involved, the specific catalytic tasks constitute the avenues of release of chemical energy by which the molecular system reproduces itself. The tasks coordinate the flow of atoms among the molecules whereby the set reforms itself. From the point of view of the tasks, the molecular species manage to carry out the tasks repeatedly, with no further molecular species being necessary to carry out the tasks. The molecules carry out the tasks, the tasks coordinate, or organize, the processes among the molecules.
The coordination aVorded by the catalytic tasks that are jointly present and fulfilled is highlighted if we recall that, in general, two molecular species, say, A’ and A”, might undergo a variety of diVerent reactions that form, in addition to A, perhaps E, L, M, P, and other molecular species. The specific catalytic task that carries A’ and A’’ to A in the presence of a catalyst, B, speeds that specific reaction in comparison to the alternative reactions forming E, L, M, and P. Thus, the closure of the catalytic tasks, substrates and catalysts, A, B, A’, A”, B’, B”, achieves a coordination, or organization, of the flow of matter and energy into the autocatalytic system.
The organization achieved by the closure of catalytic tasks is similar to the organization achieved by the gears and escapements together with the rest of the idealized Carnot engine. The flow of process is marshaled into an organized whole. In the case of the autocatalytic set, the set reproduces itself. It also seems worth stressing that this closure in catalytic task space is a new concept with real physical meaning. It is a matter of objective fact whether or not a physical reaction system achieves catalytic closure; the hypothetical AB system above, and any free-living cell, achieves catalytic closure.
A final preliminary will bring us to our attempted definition of an autonomous agent. This preliminary is based on the distinction, noted above, between spontaneous and nonspontaneous chemical reactions. At equilibrium, the net rate of formation or destruction of each molecular species is zero, aside from small fluctuations that damp out. Thus, if two molecular species, X and Y, interconvert, the equilibrium is attained at that ratio of X and Y concentrations at which Y converts to X as fast as X converts to Y. If the reaction is displaced in one direction, say there is a higher X concentration than the equilibrium ratio, then the spontaneous, or exergonic, reaction proceeds in the direction toward equilibrium that reduces the excess of X concentration (Figure 3.3).
All spontaneous chemical reactions, if coupled to no other source of energy, are exergonic. On the other hand, if some other free energy source is coupled to the reaction, the reaction can be driven “beyond equilibrium” by using some of the energy source. Reactions that are driven beyond equilibrium by addition of free energy are called endergonic. Thus X might convert to Y, and this reaction might be coupled to another source of free energy, such that the steady state concentration of Y is much higher than the normal equilibrium X:Y ratio (Figure 3.3).
In the Carnot cycle, completion of the work cycle involved the cylinder piston system doing exergonic work on the external world during the power stroke, then the outside world doing work on the cylinder piston system when you pushed on the piston to recompress the working gas. The Carnot cycle links mechanical and thermal energy sources into a work cycle. A chemical reaction network with a work cycle will have to link spontaneous, exergonic and nonspontaneous, endergonic reactions into the chemical analogue of a work cycle. Like the cyclic Carnot engine, the chemical analogue will have to work in a cycle of states, like the 1, 2, 3, 4, 1 cycle of the Carnot cycle. Further, in order for the cycle to operate at a finite rate, hence irreversibly, the autonomous agent must be an open thermodynamic system driven by outside sources of matter or energy = hence “food” = and the continual driving of the system by such “food” holds the system away from equilibrium.
In this light, think again of the Ghadiri autocatalytic system, the 32-amino-acid sequence A that ligates two fragments A’, a 15-amino-acid fragment, and A”, a 17-amino-acid fragment, into A. This reaction is purely exergonic. The reaction proceeds from the substrate fragments A’ and A’’ to form the product molecule A and approaches the equilibrium ratio of substrates to product. Ghadiri’s autocatalytic system is wonderful, but merely exergonic. It does not achieve a work cycle. In general, autocatalytic and collectively autocatalytic systems can be purely exergonic. In any such case, no work cycle is achieved.
Now we can return to my jumped-to definition: An autonomous agent is a reproducing system that carries out at least one thermodynamic work cycle. That bacterium, sculling up the glucose gradient, flagellum flailing in work cycles, is busy as hell doing “it,” reproducing and carrying out one or more work cycles. So too are all free-living cells and organisms. We do, in blunt fact, link spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes in richly webbed pathways of interaction that achieve reproduction and the persistent work cycles by which we act on the world. Beavers do build dams; yet beavers are “just” physical systems.
But Reza Ghadiri’s example of an autocatalytic peptide doesn’t make the grade, nor does Gunter von Kiedrowski’s autocatalytic hexamer DNA or collectively autocatalytic set of two DNA hexamers. All these systems are merely exergonic. No work cycle is performed.
Now that we have stated our proposed definition of an autonomous agent, it is not too hard to imagine a chemical realization. In Figure 3.4 I show a hypothetical molecular autonomous agent. Given visualization of a first case, I expect that we will be constructing molecular autonomous agents within a few years.
Figure 3.4, our first example of a candidate molecular autonomous agent, is “constructed” to link with two further molecular systems, the exergonic auto-catalytic system developed by Gunter von Kiedrowski based on ligation of two DNA trimers by their complementary hexamer. Here, the hexamer is simplified to 3’CCCGGG5’, and the two complementary trimers are 5’GGG3’ + 5’CCC3’. Left to its own devices, this reaction is exergonic and, in the presence of excess trimers compared to the equilibrium ratio of hexamer to trimers, will flow exergonically toward equilibrium by synthesizing the hexamer. Because the hexamer is itself the catalyst for the reaction, the synthesis of hexamer is autocatalytic.
The first additional system consists in pyrophosphate, PP, a high-energy dimer of monophosphate that breaks down to form two monophosphates, P + P. Like any reaction, the reaction converting PP to P + P has an equilibrium, hence an equilibrium ratio of PP and P. In the presence of excess PP compared to equilibrium, the reaction flows toward equilibrium by the spontaneous cleavage of PP to yield P + P.
My purpose in invoking the exergonic conversion of PP to P + P is to utilize the loss of free energy in this exergonic reaction to drive the DNA trimer-hexamer reaction beyond its own equilibrium, leading thereby to an excess synthesis of the 3’CCCGGG5’ hexamer when compared to its equilibrium concentration. Thus, the excess synthesis of the hexamer, which would not occur spontaneously, is driven endergonically by being coupled to the exergonic breakdown of PP to P + P (Figure 3.4). In short, the exergonic breakdown of PP to P + P supplies the free energy to drive the excess buildup of 3’CCCGGG5’ concentration beyond its own equilibrium with respect to its trimer substrates, 5’GGG3’ and 5’CCC3’.
The excess synthesis of 3’CCCGGG5’ constitutes excess reproduction of the hexamer autocatalytic reaction product beyond that which would occur without the coupling to the additional PP free energy source. Thus, the system is reproducing “better” with the coupling to PP than without the coupling.
Another point to note is that the coupling of the breakdown of PP to P + P with the excess synthesis of the DNA hexamer compared to the equilibrium concentration of the DNA hexamer means that energy is stored within the system. This is true because the excess concentration of the hexamer DNA, compared to its equilibrium, could in principle be released by degradation of the hexamer to the two trimer substrates, releasing that stored free energy as this reaction couple flowed toward its own equilibrium ratio of hexamer and trimers. Thus, the coupling to the PP to P + P reaction means that the autonomous agent stores energy internally. Later in evolution, such internally stored energy can be used to drive reactions that correct errors, as in DNA repair in contemporary cells. I am glad to thank Phil Anderson and, indirectly, John Hopfield for this point.
Once the pyrophosphate, PP, is cleaved to form P + P, as this reaction flows toward its own equilibrium ratio of PP to P, that free energy is used up. In order to have a renewed internal supply of the free energy needed to synthesize excess hexamer, it is convenient to resynthesize pyrophosphate from the two monophosphates, P + P. I’ll return below to the meaning of “convenient,” for in a general sense, the convenience reflects the organization of processes that sustains an agent, and that organization is not convenient, it is essential.
Resynthesis of PP from P + P requires the addition of free energy. This is true because we used the exergonic breakdown of PP to P + P to drive the excess synthesis of 3’CCCGGG5’. Now we need to add energy to resynthesize PP from P + P. To do so, I invoke an additional source of free energy in the form of an electron, e, which absorbs a photon, hv; is driven endergonically to an excited state, e*, and falls back exergonically to its low-energy state, e, in a reaction that is coupled to the synthesis of PP from P + P.
The point of this third reaction-couple is clear: PP is resynthesized from P + P so that PP can continue to drive the excess synthesis of the DNA hexamer, 3’CCCGGG5’. Overall, the total system of linked reactions is exergonic = there is an overall loss of free energy that is ultimately supplied by the incoming photon, hv, plus the 2 substrates, 5’GGG3’, and 5’CCC3’. Thus, we are not cheating the second law.
Let’s return to the Carnot cycle, where I had you pushing and pulling on the handle and on the piston itself during the work cycle. We noted that in a real engine you would not be busy pushing and pulling. Your role in organizing the processes would be taken by gears, escapements, rods, connectors, bearings, and other bits of machinery.
I now invoke the analogue of the gears, rods, and connectors in the form of hypothetical molecular couplings that control the reactions I have already invoked. Specifically, I will assume that the hexamer, 3’CCCGGG5’, is the catalyst that couples ligation of the two trimers, 5’GGG3’ + 5’CCC3’, to the exergonic breakdown of PP to P + P. My second assumption is that monophosphate, P, binds to the hexamer and facilitates the reaction. Thus, I am assuming that P is an allosteric enhancer of the reaction. “Allosteric” means that P binds to a site on the enzyme, here the hexamer, other than the hexamer’s own binding site for the substrates. Allosteric enhancers and inhibitors are common in biological systems. 
Here, P might bind to the sugar-phosphate backbone of the DNA hexamer. This coupling implies that as PP breaks down to form P + P, the monophosphate, P, will feed back to further activate the hexamer enzyme, making the catalysis of hexamer formation even more rapid. Just such a positive feedback of a reaction product on the enzyme forming it occurs in the famous glycolytic pathway that is the core of metabolism in your cells. In fact, under appropriate experimental conditions, this positive feedback coupling can cause the glycolytic pathway to undergo sustained temporal oscillations in the concentrations of the glycolytic metabolites.
Finally, I will invoke a few more couplings. I assume that one of the trimers, 5’CCC3’, is the catalyst that couples the exergonic loss of free energy from the activated electron, e* to e, with the resynthesis of PP from P + P. And I invoke an allosteric inhibition of this catalysis by PP itself. Thus, when PP is in high concentration, it tends to inhibit its own resynthesis. But when PP concentration falls, the inhibition on PP resynthesis is removed, and PP is resynthesized. The whole molecular contraption, our first hypothetical autonomous agent, is shown in Figure 3.4.
One of the first things to note about our hypothetical autonomous agent is that it constitutes a previously unstudied class of chemical reaction networks. The behavior of exergonic autocatalytic and cross-catalytic systems is beginning to be studied. The behavior of linked exergonic and endergonic reaction networks is the very stuV of intermediate metabolism and energy’s biochemical transduction, studied for years by biochemists. But, to date, no one has begun to study linked reaction networks in which autocatalysis is coupled to linked exergonic and energonic reactions. So we are entering an entirely new domain.
Thus, our molecular autonomous agent constitutes a system with two essential features of living systems, self-reproduction and metabolism. However, my insistence that an autonomous agent carries out a work cycle refines the generally understood concept of a metabolism to include the requirement that the metabolism carries out a work cycle.
The second feature to note is that our autonomous agent is, necessarily, a nonequilibrium system. Free energy, here in the form of the photon, hv, and the trimer substrates is taken in and used to drive the linked synthesis of PP and excess DNA hexamer. There is no agency at equilibrium. The excess synthesis of DNA hexamer constitutes excess replication of the hexamer by virtue of the coupling of the trimer-hexamer synthesis to the PP  P + P cycle of reactions, which, as noted next, constitute a “chemical engine.”
The third feature to note is the work cycle performed by the agent. The simplest way of seeing the work cycle here is in the behavior of the PP  P + P reaction. In the Carnot cycle, the working gas cycles from compressed and hot to less compressed and cool, back to compressed and hot. In our hypothetical autonomous agent, there is a macroscopic cycle of matter from PP to P + P via the reaction- forming DNA hexamer and back around to PP via the reaction with the high-energy electron. The macroscopic cycling of matter around this cycle is the engine at work. (I am grateful to Peter Wills for this clarification of the concept of a chemical motor.) In addition, depending upon the details of the kinetic constants, our autonomous agent may literally show an oscillatory concentration cycle in which PP concentration begins high and falls as P + P is formed, then the high PP concentration is reformed by use of the photon-energized exergonic e*  e reaction. 
Thus, the PP P + P reaction embedded in the autonomous agent constitutes a chemical engine in which there is a macroscopic net flux of matter around the PP  P + P cycle, which is operating displaced from equilibrium as it is driven by addition of energy from the photon, hv, and addition of the two DNA trimers, and as energy is drained oV to drive excess synthesis of the DNA hexamer.
The fourth thing to note about the autonomous agent is that, like the Carnot engine, the steam engine, the gas engine, and the electric engine, the autonomous agent works in a cycle. At the end of the cycle the system is poised to cycle again. A repeating organization of process is achieved. And next, just as the Carnot engine run backward is a refrigerator and not a pump, if the reactions of the autonomous agent were run backward the PP  P + P engine would run in the reverse direction. This is because all reaction couples would be displaced from equilibrium the opposite way and the analogue of throwing the gears in reverse, namely reversing in sign the positive and negative activator and inhibitor couplings to the two proper enzymes, would convert the excess energy stored in the above equilibrium concentration of hexamer into production of the two trimers and the resynthesis of PP from P + P. Were the release of the photon, hv, a readily reversible step, the excess of PP would drive emission of a photon by the excited electron, thus returning the electron to the initial unexcited state.
In short, if the autonomous agent is run backward, the autonomous agent melts down into its foodstuV. Run backward, the system is not an autonomous agent, for it does not reproduce itself and perform a work cycle. Run backward, the system is a flashlight!
Does the autonomous agent work? The answer is yes. My colleagues Andrew Daley, Andrew Girvin, Peter Wills, and Daniel Yamins and I have simulated the system of diVerential equations that correspond to the dynamics of this autonomous-agent molecular reaction network. The diVerential equations represent the way the concentration of each chemical species in the autonomous agent changes over time as a function of its own and other chemical concentrations. In general in such mathematical models, a number of unchanging constants representing kinetic constants and other parameters enter into the diVerential equations. In the present case, the diVerential equation system has thirteen such parameters. 
The model autonomous agent system is displaced from equilibrium by the persistent addition of the two DNA trimers, 5’GGG3’ and 5’CCC3’, the removal of the DNA hexamer, and the persistent shining of photons, hv, from the outside. The chemical reaction network occurs under “chemostat” conditions. This means that all molecular constituents of the system are treated mathematically as if they were in a real well-stirred container to which the trimers and photons are added at a constant rate. In addition, the hexamer molecular components are removed from the system at an adjustable rate that holds their internal concentrations constant whatever the rate of reproduction of hexamer may be.
The autonomous agent system reproduces more eYciently with the couplings of the DNA trimer-hexamer system to the PP and electron cycles than in the purely exergonic case in which the DNA trimer-hexamer system operates alone. We measured eYciency thermodynamically as the conversion of available free energy coming into the system from the photon source into the excess hexamer with respect to the undriven steady-state rate of reaction concentration of the hexamer.
Figure 3.5 shows the results of our simulations. In these simulations of the chemical reaction network, there are, as noted, thirteen kinetic constants. We carried out computer selection experiments not only comparing the autonomous agent to a nude exergonic DNA trimer-hexamer system, but also computationally mutating the kinetic constants by small amounts and computationally evolving autonomous agents to reproduce with higher thermodynamic eYciency.
Our results demonstrate first and most important that autonomous agents operating displaced from equilibrium and utilizing a work cycle can be more eYcient at using the available free energy coming into the total system in reproducing hexamer DNA than in the absence of the coupling of the trimer-hexamer DNA system to the PP and electron-photon work cycle system. Thus, the autonomous agent as a whole, including its work cycle, reproduces DNA hexamer more rapidly than would the trimer-hexamer exergonic system alone. In short, and also important, being an autonomous agent coupling an autocatalytic system with a work cycle is of selective advantage compared to being a merely exergonic autocatalytic system.
Second, just as in the glycolytic positive-feedback case, our autonomous agent model, for appropriate values of the kinetic constants, can undergo sustained temporal oscillations of PP and other concentrations. The oscillation of PP from high concentration to low concentration then back to high concentration during the work cycle is analogous to the expansion and recompression oscillation of the working gas in the Carnot engine’s work cycle.
Third, a mountainous fitness landscape exists in the mathematical parameter space of the thirteen kinetic constants, in which some values of the kinetic constants lead to higher eYciency of reproduction than others. Darwin’s natural selection could, in principle, operate if there were heritable variation in the kinetic constants.
The main conclusion to draw from our simulation is that autonomous agents coupling one or more autocatalytic and work cycles are a perfectly reasonable, if novel, form of nonequilibrium, open chemical reaction network. There is no hocus pocus here. In the near future we will almost certainly construct such autonomous-agent molecular reaction networks and study their dynamics and evolutionary behavior. A general biology is, in fact, around the corner.
The hypothetical molecular autonomous agent that we have considered has been discussed, for simplicity, as if the problem of retaining the reactants in a confined region of space could be ignored. In fact, this assumption is an idealization. Were our autonomous agent in a dilute solution, the rates of reaction would be very slow. Actual creation of a functioning molecular autonomous agent will require that the reacting molecular species be confined to a small volume or a surface or in some other fashion.
Candidates for isolation to small volumes include micelles and liposomes. Both macromolecular aggregated structures are comprised of “amphipathic molecules,” that is, molecules with hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions such as lipids. Micelles are single-layered structures which, in an aqueous medium have hydrophilic regions directed outward, but are able to enclose an aqueous core in which the other molecular species of an autonomous agent might reside. In an aqueous medium, liposomes form double-layered membranes, homologous to cell membranes, with hydrophilic heads in the aqueous medium and hydrophobic tails abutted. In an aqueous medium, both micelles and liposomes can form and even reproduce by budding. A full-fledged molecular autonomous agent would have to synthesize the lipid or similar molecular constituents of its bounding surface and coordinate budding with dispersion of autocatalytic and work cycle partners to daughter vesicles.
An alternative to isolation of the autocatalytic and work cycle molecular species within a bounding volume is the confinement of such reacting species to a surface. Such confinement has the further advantage of altering diVusive search by reactants from a three- to a two-dimensional search process. The latter can shift the corresponding chemical equilibrium toward synthesis of larger polymers from their smaller substates. Here one can imagine confinement of reactants and products to clay surfaces or confinement of complex organic reactants and products to the surfaces of the abundant dust particles in giant molecular clouds in galaxies.
I will have much more to say in subsequent chapters about the properties of molecular autonomous agents. In particular, in order to understand agents we will have to carry out a critique of the physicist’s concept of “work,” as in a work cycle, for the best understanding of “work” appears to be that work is the constrained release of energy. Yet the very constraints on the release of energy that are essential to the doing of work themselves constitute the analogues of the gears, rods, connectors, and escapements of an ordinary machine. Most important, it typically takes work itself to construct the constraints on the release of energy that then constitutes work. In our first example of an autonomous agent, Figure 3.4, these constraints are present in the invoked couplings of catalysts and allosteric eVectors to the reactions of which the autonomous agent is comprised. I have a hunch = a deep hunch verging on conviction = that the coherent organization of the construction of sets of constraints on the release of energy which constitutes the work by which agents build further constraints on the release of energy that in due course literally build a second copy of the agent itself, is a new concept, the proper formulation of which will be a proper concept of “organization.”
In the meantime, if I am right, what did Schrödinger miss? He was right about his microcode = the microcode will reemerge as a subset of the constraints on the release of energy by which an autonomous agent builds a rough copy of itself. Namely, the microcode is the very structure of DNA, which serves as constraints on the enzymes that then transcribe and translate the code. But Schrödinger missed stating the requirement for an agent to be nonequilibrium. On the other hand, displacement from equilibrium is a necessary condition for a microcode to do anything at all. So perhaps displacement from equilibrium was implicit in his theme. More important, I think, is that he missed the concept that an agent is a union of an autocatalytic system that does one or more work cycles. This union is a new kind of dynamical system.
Now that we have seen an autonomous agent, I find myself wondering whether autonomous agents may constitute a proper definition of life itself. I make no attempt to defend my own strong intuition that the answer is yes. I suspect that the concept of an autonomous agent as an autocatalytic system carrying out one or more work cycles defines life. If so, here is the center, the elusive core of life, that examination of the molecular chunks of cells does not reveal. Most of the remainder of this book is devoted to examining the unexpected unfoldings of this tentative definition of autonomous agents and, perhaps, life. But I certainly will not insist upon my intuition. It suYces at this stage to note that all free-living systems we know = single-cell bacteria, single-cell eukaryotic cells, and multicelled organisms = fulfill my definition of autonomous agent.
If Figure 3.4 shows us a first case of a molecular autonomous agent, how broad a family of systems does the concept of an autonomous agent embrace? I confess I do not know. Clearly, there is nothing in the concept of a reproducing system that carries out at least one thermodynamic work cycle that limits such a system to DNA, RNA, and proteins. As we have seen, Julius Rebek has already created self-reproducing organic molecules well outside the familiar classes of biopolymers. If no such reproducing molecular system yet enfolds a thermodynamic work cycle, that is not to say that we shall long be stalled in creating such systems. It seems plausible that wide classes of chemical reaction networks can fulfill the criteria I have traced above. But must autonomous agents be “molecular” in the familiar sense? Could mutually gravitating systems such as galaxies fulfill the criteria? What of systems made largely of photons, self-reproducing spectra in a lasing cavity fed by a gain medium? What of geomorphology? I do not know. Perhaps it suYces at this stage to have begun an enquiry, an investigation, rather than to have completed it.
Natural Games
I turn, in the final section of this chapter, to yet another puzzle concerning what I call a natural game. A natural game is a way of making a living in an environment. That is, autonomous agents are able to act on their own behalf and regularly do so in order to make a living in an environment. The bacterium swimming upstream in a glucose gradient is making a living in its environment. So, in fact, are all free-living entities in the biosphere.
Well, it seems straightforward enough; we all know more or less what it is to make a living. For example, I am currently writing Investigations as part of my own hopefully not-too-solipsistic eVorts to make my own living as a scientist.
But natural games are not quite so straightforward. I begin by mentioning again the rather surprising no-free-lunch theorem proved by Bill Macready and David Wolpert as postdoctoral fellows at the Santa Fe Institute a few years ago. Recall that Bill and David were wondering whether there might be some search algorithm for adapting on a fitness landscape that was inherently better than all other algorithms. For example, John Holland, another Santa Fe Institute colleague, is justly well-known for inventing his “genetic algorithm” to optimize hard computational problems. The genetic algorithm, which has been rather widely used in academic and industrial settings, is based on analogy with biological adaptation driven by mutation, recombination, and selection.
In eVect, Bill and David were wondering whether biological systems in this biosphere happen to have stumbled on the best possible optimization procedure. Importantly, the answer appears to be no. Macready and Wolpert considered a mathematically well-formulated set of “all possible fitness landscapes” and showed that, averaged over all landscapes, no search algorithm outperforms any other algorithm. No free lunch.
In short, given an arbitrary fitness landscape, only some search algorithms do well on that landscape. The search procedure must be tuned to the fitness landscapes being searched if the search procedure is to be more eVective than average among search procedures.
But this poses the important problem raised in chapter 1. Most organisms are sexual, hence adapt using both mutation and recombination as part of their search procedures in making natural livings. But my own and other research demonstrates that recombination is essentially useless on very rugged fitness landscapes. For example, Mark Feldman and Aviv Bergman at Stanford have shown that if genes that evolve on rugged landscapes increase the frequency of recombination in model populations of organisms, they will not be selected to increase, hence establish, recombination. Yet most organisms are sexual and pay the twofold loss in fitness in requiring two parents rather than one. If so, presumably our biosphere is rife with the kinds of smooth correlated landscapes for which recombination is a good search procedure.
Then how is it that in our biosphere we should find a family of landscapes that happen to be well searched by recombination? Either such smooth landscapes are built into the physical nature of things or evolution has itself somehow brought forth the very kinds of landscapes that are well searched by mutation and recombination. Restated, assuming that mutation and recombination are, in fact, good search procedures for the kinds of fitness landscapes inhabited by we mere mortals as we were hanging around and adaptively hill climbing for the past four billion years, I ask again: Whence these wonderful fitness landscapes that are so well suited to be climbed by mutation and recombination?
Let’s try another tack. Assume for the sake of discussion that I am right about my formulation of molecular autonomous agents. When life = and I argue, autonomous agents = began, their diversity was low. There are now some hundred million species, representing perhaps a thousandth of the total diversity that has wandered our globe. The rest have gone extinct. Natural games, ways of making a living, have obviously coevolved with the autonomous agents, the species, making those livings. So, as I imagined Darwin telling us in chapter 1, “The winning natural games are the games the winning species play.”
Well, of course, the winning natural games are the games the winners play. But what natural games are these? The reasonable answer leaps to mind. The winning games must be those that are readily searched out by the very adaptive search procedures used by the coevolving autonomous agents themselves.
In short, a biosphere is a self-consistent coevolutionary construction of autonomous agents and ways of making a living that are themselves self-consistently well searched by the search procedures the autonomous agents are using. In colloquial terms, from our experience in economic systems, jobs come into existence with jobholders. If no one can learn or exploit a given kind of job, that sort of job will not be widely populated and will not become diVerentiated into a family of similar jobs.
In the biosphere, modes of making a living that are well-searched by mutation and recombination will be populated by many sibling species making their livings by playing slightly diVerent natural games. Those natural games, therefore, proliferate. Ways of making a living that cannot be explored successfully by mutation and recombination will not aVord new niches for many sibling species, so those natural games will not proliferate.
We are literally making our world together, we critters. If we couldn’t make livings at it given our search procedures of mutation, recombination, and selection, we wouldn’t be making our livings doing what we are doing. These comments are only the start of understanding, and I do not profess to hold much of that understanding. But I can begin to point. A biosphere is a self-consistent coevolutionary construction of autonomous agents making livings, the natural games that constitute those livings, and the search mechanisms that allow such modes of living to be persistently mastered by adaptive natural selection.
Most broadly, I believe a general biology awaits founding. And I believe that autonomous agents will prove central to that eVort. The next feature of autonomous agents that I will note in closing this chapter will be central to any general biology. Precisely because an autonomous agent links exergonic and endergonic reactions in work cycles, the breakdown of high-energy sources here can be used to build up structure and organization there. Indeed, the coevolution of autonomous agents naturally leads to a linked web of exergonic and endergonic reactions within and between the autonomous agents. Breakdown of this stuV here is linked to the excess build up of that stuV there. By these linkages, sunlight spattered carelessly on this swirl of stuV ninety-three million miles from our average star cumulates into the wondrous structure of the giant redwoods, tall on the western slopes of the United States and Canada. Precisely because autonomous agents carry out work cycles, they = we = literally build a biosphere.
And the central factors underlying that buildup of organization are the same factors that apply in an economy = that merely human extension of biospheres. The central factors, in fact, center on “advantages of trade.” We can see this keystone concept by supposing that you and I are the only members of a tiny economy. You begin life with an endowment of a thousand pears and a hundred apples. I begin life with an endowment of a hundred pears and a thousand apples. Suppose your happiness, or “utility,” would increase if you had fewer rather than more pears and more rather than fewer apples. Alas, you have more pears than apples. I, in turn, happen to have desires such that I would be happier with rather more pears than apples. Alas, I have more apples than pears.
You and I have advantages of trade. We can both be happier if we swap some of my apples for some of your pears. It is essential to understand that, indeed, both of us can be better oV by trading. Advantages of trade are the fundamental factor driving trade itself in an economy. In an actual simple economic model, advantages of trade are studied in an “Edgeworth box.” Edgeworth invented a two-dimensional box representation of values, or “worths,” plotted along the edge of his box (Figure 3.6). In the Edgeworth box, I am represented at the bottom-left corner, you are represented at the top-right corner. A family of equal happiness, or “isoutility” curves, show your “isohappiness” trade-oVs of apples and pears at any total abundance to you of apples and pears. You are, in general, happier the more total apples and pears you have. Your happiness landscape increases from low to high like a cone-shaped mountain whose peak is located over my head. On that peak, you have all the apples and pears in the system.
My isohappiness trade-oV curves begin low at the lower-left corner and mount to a peak over your head in the upper-right corner, when I would have all the apples and pears.
The curvature of my isohappiness curves and your isohappiness curves are bent such that they are convex from my and your points of view. Therefore, if the initial economy starts with you having most of the pears and I most of the apples, as shown as a point toward the lower-right of the Edgeworth box in Figure 3.6, then that initial point of the economy lies on the intersection of a specific isohappiness curve for you and an isohappiness curve for me.
And now we can see advantages of trade. Any point that lies inside the region bounded by our two isohappiness curves is, therefore, higher on your happiness landscape and also higher on my happiness landscape. Thus, anywhere inside the region bounded by our two isohappiness curves, we are both happier. We have advantages of trade within this area bounded by our two isohappiness curves.
A few more points from Economics 100. Consider the family of your isohappiness curves and the family of my isohappiness curves. Pick one of your isohappiness curves. There will be exactly one of my isohappiness curves that just touches your isohappiness curve at a single position, thus one point of tangency. Therefore, for each of your isohappiness curves, there is a unique point of tangency with one of my isohappiness curves. Therefore we can draw a line connecting those points of tangency. In particular, we can draw a line of those tangencies across the two isohappiness curves, yours and mine, that meet at the initial apple-pear distributions to you and me at the outset, before trading, and define the region where we have advantages of trade.
The line of tangency is called the “contract curve.” Along the contract curve, there is no way to exchange apples and pears that increases both our happiness. If you are happier, I am less happy. The contract curve is said to be “Pareto-eYcient.” There is no way to make you happier without making me less happy, and vice versa. In contrast, if we have not yet attained the contract curve, there are further advantages of trade that we can attain. The economic concept of “price” in this context is just the ratio of exchange between you and me, apples for pears. Evidently, if we attain one of the points on the contract curve, that corresponds to some exchange ratio and is the price of apples for pears.
Now, nothing in a one-shot exchange economy picks any particular point on the contract curve. We tussle along the contract curve, each trying to get all the advantages of the trade. But what if we could take our happiness, now call it utility or wealth, and reinvest it in making orchards that grew apples and pears? In an economy with reinvestment, what happens if we can take our advantages of trade and reinvest any excess so that we can create more apples and pears than we had to start with?
Then let me draw an analogy for bacterial species or other autonomous agents. Let happiness, or the economist’s utility, become “rate of reproduction,” hence, fitness. Let increased happiness become “increased rate of reproduction,” hence, increased fitness. Let the advantages of trade map into mutualistic interactions in which you and I, two species of autonomous agents, help one another reproduce more rapidly. Case in point: Legume root systems with microrhizzae and symbiotic fungi, in which the root and its plant capture sunlight and water and carbon dioxide and supply sugars to the fungi, while the fungi capture nitrogen from the air and fix it into amino acids and supply amino acids to the plant. Plant and fungi feed one another.
Two mutualists, A and B, can have advantages of trade. Molecules created at metabolic cost in A and secreted can help B reproduce faster. Molecules created at metabolic cost in B and secreted can help A reproduce faster. If the help is larger than the metabolic cost in both directions, both win by helping the other. Indeed, you can quickly intuit that, since both A and B will reproduce exponentially, there might be a fixed ratio of the abundance of A and abundance of B species such that each helps the other optimally. If so, then the enhancement in the growth of A and B by their mutual interaction must be the same, otherwise, either A or B would soon be exponentially more abundant than the other, and the mutual help society would fall apart.
Peter Schuster and Peter Stadler of the University of Vienna and I at the Santa Fe Institute several years ago created a simple model of two replicating RNA species, A and B, that did help one another in just these ways, and it confirmed that in the appropriate mutual help regime, the A + B mixed community outgrew A alone or B alone. Further, the growth was such that the ratio of A and B remained fixed. Therefore, the exchange of A’s product molecules and B’s product molecules also remained fixed at a specific point on the contract curve. That point corresponds to price. So in at least some simple models, when autonomous agents form a mutualism, A and B helping one another, they have found a means to create advantages of trade, and they can find and remain on a fixed point on the contract curve that establishes an exchange ratio = the price.
And note with the plant root and the fungi, thermodynamic work has been done by the plant to synthesize the sugars from sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide, and thermodynamic work has been done by the fungi to fix nitrogen from the air into amino acids. In a real biosphere, the linking of exergonic to endergonic reactions by which thermodynamic work is done to build up complex organization is, in fact, inextricably linked with the emergence of new advantages of trade = new, enhanced ways to make livings in new niches. In the present case, the exchange of sugar and amino acids helps both plant and fungi reproduce more rapidly.
So, as noted earlier, the fact that autonomous agents do link exergonic and endergonic reactions is central to the creation of advantages of trade and hence, new niches, new mutualistic opportunities. They lead to the vast web of an ecosystem trapping sunlight; gobbling some water, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and a few other simple molecular species; and literally building up the vast profusion of Darwin’s tangled bank. Ultimately, we should be able to build a theory that accounts for the distribution of advantages of trade, the distribution of residence times of energy stored in diVerent forms in an ecosystem, as well as the statistical patterns of linking of exergonic and endergonic reactions in a biosphere as it builds itself and persistently explores novel ways of making a living, the novel niches that permit the success of Darwin’s minor variations creating novel species for those niches.
The curious thing about evolution is that everyone thinks he understands it? Not me. Not yet. Yet I hope there may be general principles governing the self-consistent construction of any biosphere. In later chapters I will hazard a hunch or two about such general laws, but we are only at the beginning of a general biology.




Chapter 4
Propagating Organization
his book, with its curious title, Investigations, seeks new questions about the universe. It is not always that everything is hidden and science must ferret out the mysteries by scouring for unknown facts, although often science proceeds in the manner of finding new facts. Rather it can be the case that the world is bluntly in front of us, but we lack the questions of the world that would allow us to see. There are stories, perhaps merely stories, of the response to early Spanish ships in the Caribbean by native inhabitants. The ships were not seen  there was no concept for them.
Bluntly in front of us: The closure of catalytic and work tasks in an autonomous agent by which it genuinely constructs a rough second copy from small building blocks by adroit linking of exergonic and endergonic processes. A cell, or colony of cells, is propagating this organization of process.
My aim in the current chapter is to begin to investigate what we might mean, and hence see, by propagating organization. No easy journey, this. I will begin with Maxwell’s demon and why measurement of a system only pays in a nonequilibrium setting. In a nonequilibrium setting, the measurements can be stored and used to extract work from the measured system. Maxwell’s demon is the clearest place in physics where matter, energy, and information come together. Yet, we will find the demon and his eorts at measurement tantalizingly incomplete: You see, only some features of a nonequilibrium system, if measured, reveal displacements from equilibrium from which work can, in principle, be extracted. Other features, even if measured, are useless for detecting such energy sources from which work can be extracted. Thus, whatever the demon’s eorts, there remain the issues of just what features of a nonequilibrium system the demon must measure such that work can be extracted, how the demon knows to measure those features rather than other useless features, and how, once measured, couplings come into existence in the universe that actually extract work. Not good enough, I shall say, to assert that in principle, work can be extracted. How does work come to be extracted?
A simple example of a device that detects displacements from equilibrium and extracts work is a windmill. The vane on the windmill in eect measures the direction of the wind and pivots the windmill such that its fan blades are perpendicular to the wind. In turn, the wind does work on the blades, causing the windmill to rotate. The system as a whole measures a deviation from equilibrium (here, the direction of the wind), orients the entire system such that extraction of work by the wind is possible for the device, and it actually extracts work. The windmill turns.
The universe as a whole  from galaxies to planetary systems, and certainly our and any other biospheres  is filled with entities that measure displacements from equilibrium that are sources of energy, those entities actually do extract work. Think of the teeming busyness of a coevolving mixed microbial community of long ago, successfully linking exergonic and endergonic reactions fired by the sun and other high-energy sources. That community measured displacements from equilibrium, extracted work, and inhabited Manhattan three billion years ago, literally building high-rise microbial mat ecosystems. Its microbial descendants are constructing similar high-rise structures in the Sea of Cortez and on the Great Barrier Reef of Australia today.
Where did all this come from, this measuring of useful displacements from equilibrium from which work can be extracted, the devices coupling to such measurements, and the extraction of work used to build up new kinds of devices that measure new kinds of displacements from equilibrium to extract work in new ways? Yet a biosphere, actually constructing itself up from sunlight, water, and a small diversity of chemical compounds, does all this over evolutionary time. The biosphere does achieve persistent measuring of displacements from equilibrium from which work can be extracted and does discover “devices” to couple to those energy sources such that work can be extracted.
And since the biosphere does this, and the biosphere is part of the universe, then the universe does it. This coming into existence of self-constructing ecosystems must, somehow, be physics. Thus, it is important that we have no theories for these issues in current physics. The stark fact that a biosphere builds up this astounding complexity and diversity suggests that our current physics is missing something fundamental. A biosphere becomes complex, the universe becomes complex. I will argue that the very diversity and complexity of a biosphere begets its further diversification and complexification. I strongly suspect that the same is true of the universe as a whole. The universe’s very diversity and complexity begets its further diversification and complexification.
After exploring Maxwell’s demon, I will ask a physicist’s question, What is work? Physicists have an answer  work is force acting through distance  given by a single number, or scalar, representing the sum of the force acting through the distance. But it will turn out that in any specific case of work, the specific process is organized in some specific way. Work is more than force acting through distance; it is, in fact, the constrained release of energy, the release of energy into a small number of degrees of freedom. It is the constraints themselves  with, as Phil Anderson points out, a kind of rigidity  that largely constitute the organization of the process. But  and here will be the hook  in many cases it takes work to construct the constraints themselves. So we will come to a terribly important circle, work is the constrained release of energy, but it often takes work to construct the constraints.
A conceptual cluster lies at the heart of the mystery. The cluster concerns the progressive emergence of organization in the evolution of the physical universe and of a biosphere. That emerging organization concerns the appearance in the evolving universe of entities measuring relevant rather than nonrelevant properties of nonequilibrium systems, by which they identify sources of energy that can perform work. Then physical entities appear that construct constraints on and couplings to the release of the identified source of energy whereby the energy is actually released and work comes to be performed. Such work often comes to be used to construct further detectors of energy sources and entities that harbor constraints on the release of energy, which when released constitutes work that constructs still further sources of energy and constraints on its release. It should be clear that we have at present no theories about these matters, nor even a clear concept of the subject matter of such theories.
The heart of the mystery concerns a proper understanding of “organization” and “propagating, diversifying organization.” Most profoundly, the mystery concerns the historical appearance since the big bang of connected structures of matter, energy, and processes by which an increasing diversity of kinds of matter, sources of energy, and types of processes come into existence in a biosphere, or in the universe itself. This is what lies directly before us but which we have not been able to see. A biosphere does all the above. Ours has for four billion years of awesome, ill-understood creativity. Doubt it? Open your eyes and look around you.
The universe, since the big bang, was and remains out of equilibrium, or vastly nonequilibrium. It was a profound insight in the development of equilibrium thermodynamics to recognize that the energy present in the thermal motions of an equilibrium gas system could not be extracted to do work. But we might ask a similar question of the nearly featureless, profound nonequilibrium of the early universe. How, in the absence of specific structures and processes, could the nonequilibrium universe couple that enormous energy to the specific generation of anything at all? Part of the answer lies in the concept of broken symmetries. Consider a pole standing vertically on a horizontal plane. In due course, it will fall over under the influence of gravity. Prior to falling, its range of possible directions to fall is the full circle. After it falls, it points in some specific direction. By falling, the pole has broken the circular symmetry of the system and come to a specific orientation. Thus part of the answer to the emergence of specific structures lies in the expansion and cooling of the universe, with the associated sequences of symmetry breakings that split the four fundamental forces, yielded a quark-gluon soup that cooled into other elementary particles, then atoms, simple molecules, self-gravitating masses, galaxies, giant molecular clouds, and second-generation stars.
As symmetries broke, the variety of matter and process increased. As the variety increased, the pairwise diversity of matter and processes increased roughly as the square of the diversity. Hence, it became more probable that specific pairs of spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes might become linked in a variety of ways, capturing the energy resources of the spontaneous processes that could then flow in constrained ways into the nonspontaneous processes to yield novel consequences. Among those consequences are the construction of new structures able to measure sources of energy. Among the other consequences are the generation of novel and specific nonequilibrium energy sources and of structures and constraints that might couple to those novel specific sources of energy. The couplings and constraints, in turn, channel the release of energy in specific ways that constitutes the work that is done to construct still further novel energy sources, measuring structures, couplings, and constraints. This, in a nutshell, is the universe diversifying, constructing structures and processes, propagating and elaborating wondrous organization.
In chapter I introduced the chemical adjacent possible and will return to it in later chapters. In terms of molecular diversity and other types of diversity, the universe and the biosphere keep advancing into a persistent adjacent possible. New kinds of molecules with new properties themselves and in couplings with other kinds of molecules persistently arise on planet Earth, and presumably in the giant cold molecular clouds that are the birthplaces of stars in most spiral galaxies. The new species of molecules aord the novel exergonic and endergonic reactions, novel constraints, and novel sources of energy that are part of the creativity outside our collective window.
Yet we hardly know how to say what this propagation and elaboration of organization and process is, nor have we a clue about whether there may be general laws that govern such self-constructing nonequilibrium processes. Such a law could be my hoped-for fourth law of thermodynamics for open self-constructing systems.
We have begun with autonomous agents. But we are here driven beyond bio-spheres. What are the general conditions that allow such self-constructing nonequilibrium processes to flourish? Are biospheres the only examples? What of the evolution of the geology of a planet, a solar system, a galaxy, the universe as a whole? Are there ways of thinking about the emergence of structures that measure and discover sources of energy in nonequilibrium systems, together with the emergence of structures and processes that couple to sources of energy, do work to construct constraints, and propagate the constrained release of the discovered energy such that more diverse structures, constraints, and processes can arise, de novo, in the adjacent possible of the evolving universe?
Is the universe highly diverse, and is our biosphere diverse, because there is some general law or tendency for such nonequilibrium self-constructing systems to diversify? I confess I suspect so. In an intuitive nutshell, in a nonequilibrium setting, the greater the diversity of structures, potential reactions, or other transformations among structures, measurement processes and devices, coupling devices, and constraints that already exist in a ramified web of propagating structures, reactions, work, measurement, constraint and coupling constructions, the easier it is for the total system to generate new kinds of molecules or other structures, processes, measurement devices, couplings, and constraints such that a biosphere or the universe can expand into the newness of its adjacent possible. But those new structures, processes, measuring devices, couplings, and constraints in turn increase the total diversity, hence, enable yet further expansion into the adjacent possible, creating perpetual autocatalytic novelty on timescales that must be vastly longer than the current age of the universe.
The universe, in short, is breaking symmetries all the time by generating such novelties, creating distinctive molecules or other forms which had never existed before. Indeed, there may be a general law for biospheres and perhaps even the universe as a whole along the following lines. A candidate fourth law: As an average trend, biospheres and the universe create novelty and diversity as fast as they can manage to do so without destroying the accumulated propagating organization that is the basis and nexus from which further novelty is discovered and incorporated into the propagating organization.
Autonomous agents themselves, self-reproducing systems carrying out one or more work cycles linking exergonic and endergonic processes in a cyclic fashion that propagate the union of catalysis, constraint construction, and process organization that constitute such autonomous agents are but the most miraculously diversifying examples of this universal process in our unfolding, ever-changing universe.
Maxwell’s Demon
Arguably James Clerk Maxwell was the greatest scientist of the nineteenth century, notwithstanding giants such as Carnot, Boltzmann, and Darwin. While his most radical work is captured in the Maxwell equations for electromagnetic fields, which introduced the fundamental concept of fields into physics, Maxwell concerned himself deeply with the puzzle Carnot had raised in what is now called the second law of thermodynamics.
Consider again a thermodynamically isolated system. That is, consider some box containing a gas, isolated from any change in its energy or mass arriving from the outside. There are N gas particles in the box, and as noted earlier, we can consider the positions and momenta of all N particles. Each position and each momentum can be decomposed into three numbers defining position and motion in the three spatial directions. Hence, the entire state of the N particles of gas can be defined by N numbers, plus a specification of the interior boundaries of the box.
As described above, all the possible states of this N system of particles can be divided into very small volumes of states, which we will call microstates. Again, as noted in chapter , a macrostate is a collection of microstates. In particular, the equilibrium macrostate is a collection of microstates having the property that the gas particles are nearly uniformly distributed in the box, with a characteristic equilibrium distribution of velocities that Maxwell himself worked out. This equilibrium macrostate has the further important properties that () vastly many microstates are in the equilibrium macrostate; () a few macroscopic features  temperature, pressure, and volume  suce to specify the equilibrium macrostate.
In terms of microstates and macrostates, as we saw, the second law can be reformulated in its famous statistical mechanics incarnation. The second law becomes the statement that, at equilibrium, the system will flow from any initial macrostate such that it spends most of its time in the equilibrium macrostate. This statement of the second law does not preclude the extremely improbable case in which the N particles just happen to flow to one corner of the box. Thus, the second law is a statistical law in statistical mechanics.
But now Maxwell enters and invents a “wee creature,” later dubbed Maxwell’s demon. (I confess that I find the use of the term “demon” here more than slightly interesting. Maxwell’s demon is almost an autonomous agent. While the demon is not defined as I have done, you will soon see that he seems to be able to make decisions and to act on the physical world. I suspect it is more than a mere coincidence that Maxwell and we seem forced to use this kind of intentional language. In fact, an odd feature of physics is that experimenters, who are outside the “system,” are always busy intentionally setting up experiments and preparing quantum systems in desired states. Surely, in a full theory the experimenters themselves, each an autonomous agent, would be part of the theory? And if not, why not? In chapter I return to this theme, for it relates to our incapacity to finitely prestate the configuration space of a biosphere.)
Maxwell asks us to consider the very same box with N particles in it. But he imagines the box to be divided into two chambers by a wall with a window in it. In the window is a flap valve. When the flap valve is open, gas particles can pass from the left to the right box via the window, or from the right to the left box via the window.
Now, smiles Maxwell, suppose the initial state of the gas in the box is in the equilibrium macrostate. No macroscopic work can be done by the equilibrium system. That was Carnot’s central point. There is plenty of energy in the random motions of the gas particles, but there is no means to extract mechanical work from it, say, to drive a piston. Next, says Maxwell, warming to his point, “Imagine that my wee friend operates the flap valve such that, whenever a fast gas particle approaches the window from inside the left box toward the right box, he opens the flap and lets the faster than average, hence hotter, gas particle through. And suppose my demon also operates the flap value to let the slower than average, hence cooler, gas particles pass from the right to the left box. Well, soon the left box will be cool and the right box will be hot. And now,” concludes Maxwell with a broad smile, “we can use the macroscopic temperature dierence between the left and right boxes to extract mechanical work, say, by driving a piston.”
There you have it. Maxwell posed a severe question for statistical mechanics and the second law. It appeared that the actions of the demon might circumvent the second law.
Maxwell’s demon has set a puzzle that is still not fully resolved. An important step in “saving” the second law was taken by Leo Szilard, who also conceived of the nuclear chain reaction one day in London and helped set in motion the development of the atomic bomb and atomic energy. Szilard carried out a calculation linking, for the first time, the concept of entropy and a new concept of information. The “entropy” of a system is a measure of its disorder. Recall that we can define the volumes of dierent macrostates by the numbers of microstates each macrostate contains. For convenience, take the logarithm of the number of microstates in each macrostate. In addition, each macrostate also has a probability of being “occupied” by the system. Multiply the logarithm of the number of microstates per macrostate by the probability that the system is in that macrostate. Now add up all these quantities for all the macrostates. The total is the entropy of the system.
Statistically, of course, the entropy of a system either increases over time or is constant. At equilibrium it is constant. If the system is released from an initially improbable macrostate, its initial entropy for the first period of time is low since most macrostates are not occupied. However, over time it will tend to spread out over all possibilities, and the sum of the probabilities of occupancy times macrostate volumes will increase to the equilibrium value.
Szilard took a first step in thinking about what Shannon later called information. Roughly Szilard realized that when the demon lets a faster or a slower gas particle pass specifically into the left or right box, respectively, then the total entropy of the system is decreasing a little bit. But in turn Szilard estimated the amount of work that must be done by the demon to discriminate that the gas particle is faster or slower than average. It turns out that the work that must be done, hence the energy utilized, equals the work that can later be extracted from the system after the fast and slow particles are separated into the two boxes. Since the work done by the demon equals the work that later can be extracted from the system, no net work can be extracted from the equilibrium system, and the second law is saved.
The link to information due to Shannon comes next. Shannon was concerned with transmitting signals down wires. He brilliantly thought of the minimal signal as a yes or no answer, hence representable as the binary or , now called a “bit.” Shannon considered the entropy of a source sending a prospective signal as the set of possible messages that might be sent, where each message was to be weighted by the probability of actually being sent. He thought of receiving a message as reducing the entropy, or uncertainty, about which message was actually sent, given the initial set of possible messages. Thus, Shannon wound up reinventing the same mathematics that covers entropy. Here there is an ensemble of messages, and each can be thought of as occupying a volume in a space of possible messages. Each message is sent with some probability from the source. So Shannon took the logarithm of the volume in message space occupied by a message and multiplied it by the probability that that message was sent from the source. If the fraction of the total volume of message space occupied by a given message is “p,” then the logarithm of this volume is “logp” and the probability of that volume is “p.” Thus, the logarithm of a probability of a message multiplied by that probability itself is “plogp.” The sum of these “plogp” terms for the total set of messages at the source is the entropy of the source. Reception of a signal reduces the receiver’s uncertainty about what is being sent from the source, hence is a negative entropy. Shannon’s information measure is, thus, just the negative of the normal entropy measure.
The link established by Szilard between information and Maxwell’s demon is, roughly, that the discrimination by the demon that a given gas molecule is faster or slower than average and whether it is coming from the left or right box (hence, whether he should open or close the flap valve) constitutes a measurement that extracts information about the gas system, hence, lowers the uncertainty about the gas system, hence, lowers the entropy of the gas system.
Importantly, there is an implied observer in discussions about entropy. Thus, a physicist might typically say that the entropy of a system is due to “our coarse graining” of the system into (arbitrarily) chosen macrostates. If “we” had more information about the microscopic states of the system, our more refined coarse graining would reduce the entropy of the system from our point of view. Indeed, there has been some genuine confusion about the role of the observer and his more or less arbitrary choice of coarse graining in the concept of entropy.
One resolution to this confusion has been suggested by Rolf Sinclair and Wojciech Zurek, who have returned to the demon problem with a wonderful set of concepts. When the demon has at it with the flap valve, he is, in fact, performing measurements on the gas system. As he performs the measurements, he “knows” more about the detailed state of the system. Now just what might it mean to know about the gas system? One useful sense of “know” is that the demon has some compact description of the state of the gas system. Indeed, the compact description of the equilibrium state is about as compact as you can get: A few macroscopic variables  temperature, pressure, volume  suce.
One modern sense of a compact description of something is a computer program. We are to think of the computer program as a calculating engine. We give it initial input data. It has some program, typically written as a sequence of binary numbers, and , and the program operates on the input data, also a string of binary symbols, and churns out an answer. Then the concept of a compact description becomes the concept of the shortness of the symbol string giving the input data and the shortness of the program. In order to maximize compression, we must get all redundancy out of both the input symbol string and the symbol string representing the program.
Sinclair and Zurek have independently carried out work that shows the following: Initially, as the demon operates, his knowledge about the system increases, hence, the entropy of the gas system decreases. But at the same time, as the demon’s information about the system increases, the length of the most compact description of the system increases as well. In fact, the length of the most compact description increases, on average, exactly as fast as does the decrease in the entropy of the gas system.
But as the length of the most compact description increases, bit by actual bit, its information content increases, bit by bit. Thus, for each bit in reduction of the entropy of the gas system achieved by our measurements, the information content of the most compact description increases, on average, exactly as rapidly. Or, as Zurek says, in the modern interpretation, the sum of the entropy of the gas system plus the observer’s knowledge about that system is a constant for an equilibrium gas system.
Well, we could still cheat and extract work from our measured gas system using the information about its microstate achieved by all the measurements. But Sinclair notes that, in the long run, the cheat will not work. We have had to record the information about the gas system somewhere, say, in the registers on a silicon chip. At some point in a closed system, the chip will be filled up with bits in registers. To keep measuring the equilibrium system, we will have to erase the chip. And Sinclair did the calculation that mirrors Szilard’s. To erase a memory-stored bit has a minimal energy cost that exactly balances the work we could get from the gas system by using the stored information about the system. The second law, again in the statistical sense, holds. No macroscopic work can be done by an equilibrium system. Measurement does not pay in an equilibrium setting.
Why this long discourse? Because it does pay to measure the gas system if the gas system is not at equilibrium. Think of a simple example: The gas particles in the left box are actually hotter than the gas particles in the right box. Thus, pressure in the left box is higher than in the right box. If the flap valve is opened, gas will tend to flow from the left to the right box until equilibrium is established. Note that a very simple, compact description has captured these features of the nonequilibrium system, and work can be extracted as the gas system flows to equilibrium.
More generally, Zurek’s point is that as measurements are performed on a nonequilibrium gas system, the length of the most compact description increases more slowly than the knowledge thus gained reduces the entropy of the system. It pays to measure the nonequilibrium system in the sense that those measurements specify the displacements from equilibrium that constitute energy sources that can be utilized to extract work.
So the demon is indeed a place in physics where matter, energy, information, and indeed, work, come together.
Let’s consider just how work might actually be extracted in the classical Maxwell demon situation with an ideal gas in two boxes separated by a partition with the window and flap valve. As a simple example, consider again the tiny windmill mentioned above, consisting of a fan and a vane perpendicular to the fan. Let the windmill be located very near the window with the flap valve inside the total gas system. If the flap valve is opened, a wind will pass transiently from the left to the right box. The windmill’s vane will measure the direction of the wind and actually orient the windmill fan blades perpendicular to the wind. The wind will cause the fan to turn, thus the turning fan extracts mechanical work from the system until equilibrium is reached.
But now we need to pause and reflect, for the story of the demon is both tantalizing and incomplete. Consider again our tiny windmill. What feature of the total gas system was measured and detected such that work could be extracted? Roughly, the wind from the left to the right box.
But not all measurements of the two-box system would have resulted in information that was useful, in the sense that work could have been extracted by the actual box in its actual configuration. For example, the box with the flap valve separates the left and right boxes; suppose that there is an identical number of gas molecules in the two equal-sized boxes and that the gas in the left box is hotter than the gas in the right box. Further, suppose the demon measures the number and instantaneous locations of all the gas particles in the left and right boxes. The fact that the particles in the left box are hotter than those in the right box, hence are moving faster than those in the right box, would not be revealed by a measurement of the instantaneous numbers and locations of all the gas particles in the left and right boxes. To measure faster motion, the demon must measure positions at two time moments or some other feature, such as the recoil of the box’s walls from the momentum transferred by the hotter versus cooler gas particles in the left and right boxes as they bounce o the wall. So, just how does the demon decide (Figure .) or come to measure the relevant properties such that an energy source is successfully identified such that work can be extracted?
We have, in fact, no answer as yet.
But this is an essential issue. Only certain features of a nonequilibrium system will, upon measurement, reveal a displacement from equilibrium that can actually be used to extract work. Other features, if measured, are useless with respect to revealing a displacement from equilibrium that can be used to extract work by any given specific system.
It is important to stress that we have here a sense of “useful” outside the context of autonomous agents. Useful measurements detect features of displacements from equilibrium that reveal energy sources from which work can be extracted. Only some measurements are actually useful in this sense in a biosphere, a geosphere, or a galaxy. These useful measurements participate together with the coming into existence of devices that extract work used to build further measurement and work extraction structures, in the gradual buildup of the diversity of structures and processes of a biosphere, a geosphere, a galaxy, or a universe. This buildup is part of why the universe is complex.
I believe that we can ultimately create a statistical theory of the probability of the generation of specific novel processes, structures, and energy sources; propagation of measurements; detection of useful sources of energy; and couplings of structures and processes to the energy sources to extract work and progressively build up still further new structures, energy sources, and processes  all as a function of the current diversity of structures, transformation processes, and measuring and coupling entities. Such statistical theories should be constructable, for example, for a giant cold molecular galactic cloud or early prebiotic planet or, most fundamentally, the expanding universe as a whole. We need a theory in which symmetry breaking begets further symmetry breaking in a progressive construction of diversifying structures and processes. Chapter , with its discussion of the origin of self-reproducing molecular systems as a phase transition to supracritical behavior in catalyzed chemical reaction graphs as a function of molecular diversity and the ratio of reactions to molecular species, is a partial prototype for such a statistical theory. A further partial prototype is present in chapter , with its discussion of autonomous agents as self-reproducing physical systems that do successfully measure displacements from equilibrium and do successfully evolve to couple exergonic and endergonic reactions to achieve completed work cycles. The vast and richly coupled network of coupled exergonic and endergonic reactions in the global ecosystem is proof positive of such propagating construction in the physical universe. In chapter I will discuss a quantum analogue to such a theory, in which complex quantum systems that couple tend to “decohere” irreversibly to classical behavior and thereby progressively build up complex classical structures.
It is also important to unpack the sense, three paragraphs above, of “actually” and “any specific system.” Consider a single gas particle in a box. Measure its location, left or right of any arbitrary surface transecting the box. Here “arbitrary” means that we can choose to perform any such measurement we wish by placing the partition arbitrarily in the box. If we know the particle is to the left of a given arbitrary partition, we can in principle extract work by allowing the particle to pass through a window in the partition and do work on a fan as it passes to the right box. Hence, it seems that in principle any such arbitrary measurement can detect a source of energy that can be used to extract work.
But the conclusion is false that any arbitrary measurement of our single-gas-molecule system can detect a displacement from equilibrium from which work can be extracted. The “in principle” just above includes the idea that, having made an arbitrary choice of placement of the partition and a measurement of which side of the partition the particle is in and, hence, having detected by that arbitrary measurement the displacement from equilibrium that is a source of energy, we can afterward decide on a construction procedure that will utilize the information about the displacement from equilibrium to extract work from the measured, nonequilibrium system. In short, we can place the windmill in the system after we have measured the location of the gas particle. We measure first, then place the windmill in the compartment that does not have the particle of gas, such that that particle, upon passing through the flap valve, will cause the windmill to turn slightly.
But what if we already have constructed the system that is to extract the work, as in the tiny windmill case, and already mounted the windmill at a specific location inside the box? Thereafter we perform an arbitrary measurement by placing the partition in the box and then locate the gas particle. We may have placed the partition in the box such that the windmill is on the same side of the partition that has the gas molecule, rather than placing the partition such that the prepositioned windmill is in the empty side. No net work can be extracted. The gas molecule will repeatedly bounce o the windmill fan from all angles. No net rotation of the fan can occur.
Thus, in a concrete context, when we can no longer alter the work-extracting structure, such as the location of the windmill, but perform the measurement after the work-extracting system is in place, then only certain measurements of the nonequilibrium system will detect sources of energy that can couple to the work-extracting structure such that work is extracted. Other measurements of the extant nonequilibrium system may be utterly useless in the sense that no sources of energy that can couple to the work-extracting system are detected.
We see the hints here of something new. Only certain features of a given nonequilibrium system, if measured, will result in detection of sources of energy that might become coupled to specific other processes that, by doing work, propagate macroscopic changes in the universe. Moreover, the tiny windmill is an example of a device that not only detects the wind from the left to the right box, but also orients the fan perpendicular to that wind and has couplings and constraints embodied in its structure such that mechanical work is actually extracted.
Fine, but we built the tiny windmill. How do such coupling structures that link identified sources of energy to the carrying out of work come to exist in the universe on their own? There is not the slightest doubt, for example, that such entities have come into existence in our biosphere as autonomous agents have coevolved over the eons. Thus, a host of new questions are raised. In the beginning, presumably, the universe was simple, homogeneous, featureless, almost isotropic. Now it is vastly complex. In the beginning, the early Earth had a paucity of complex molecules, chemical reactions, linked structures and processes. Now it is vastly complex. 
The universe as a whole has witnessed the coming into existence of novel structures and processes; so too has the biosphere. Where no dierence existed, dierences have come into existence. In a general sense, the persistent emergence of dierent structures and processes is the persistent breaking of the symmetry of the universe. What feeds this apparent propagating diversity? One aspect may be the following. Consider again the case of the box with the flap valve and something simpler than a fan, say a small mica flake suspended in the cooler of the left and right boxes. If the flap valve “be opened,” a wind from the hotter to the cooler box is transiently present. This is a simple displacement from equilibrium, and a simple device, the mica flake, will be made to quake, hence, extract mechanical work. 
Now consider an antiferromagnetic material. Such material has magnetic dipoles that, when adjacent, prefer to point in opposite directions. The north pole of one prefers to be adjacent to the south poles of its neighbors. If arranged along a straight line, an antiferromagnetic material has two equivalent lowest-energy “ground” states, NSNSNSNSN versus SNSNSNSNS. Now consider a subtle displacement from one of these lowest-energy states, say NNNSNSSSN. Here, rather than alternating N and S poles being next to one another, runs of NNN and SSS occur. The energy of the total system would be lowered if the dipoles flipped orientation to come closer to one or the other of the ground energy states. Therefore, at a suciently low temperature such that the system can flow to and remain at a ground state, the NNNSNSSSN antiferromagnet is displaced from its lowest-energy equilibrium state, and in principle, work could be extracted from this system as it relaxes to one of the two lowest-energy states. But notice now that, compared to detecting the direction of the wind by the mica flake, a rather complex and subtle measurement must be made by any measuring device that is to detect the subtle displacement from equilibrium and that any device that is to use that displacement to extract work must be correspondingly subtle. Roughly speaking, a measuring device must be of similar complexity to the antiferromagnet. Indeed, a second antiferromagnet could serve as a measuring device if it were near its own ground state and brought into proximity to the first antiferromagnet. The runs of SSS and NNN in the first antiferromagnet, brought close to a second one with ground state runs of SNS and NSN could cause the first antiferromagnet to flip closer to its ground states. Hence, the measuring-detecting-extracting device must be more structurally and functionally complex than a mere mica flake considered as a thin planar crystal.
The linked exergonic and endergonic organic chemistry reactions present in the molecular autonomous agents that we call cells exemplify just this structural and functional subtlety. The electric charge distribution on two complex organic molecules brought into proximity, coupled with the modes of translational, vibrational, and rotational motions, constitute the subtle means to measure displacements from equilibrium, couple to those displacements, and achieve linked catalyzed exergonic and endergonic reactions. As the molecular diversity of the biosphere increases, more such molecular species displaced from equilibrium come into existence, more such molecular species able to detect such displacements from equilibrium come into existence, more such coupled catalyzed exergonic and endergonic reactions come into existence.
In general, it would begin to appear that as a higher diversity of entities come into existence  entities that are then necessarily more complex  their modes of being in nonequilibrium conditions increase in diversity and subtlety. In turn, the very existence of sets of these increasingly diverse and complex entities gives them an increased number of ways, and so an increased probability, to couple with one another such that one may measure a displacement from equilibrium of the other; hence, these entities happen upon a source of energy that can be and is extracted to do work. In turn, that work may drive nonspontaneous processes to create still more complex molecular species or other entities in the adjacent possible.
In short, there appears to be some positive relationship between the diversity and complexity of structures or processes and the diversity and complexity of the features of a nonequilibrium system, which can be detected and measured by the detecting structure to identify a source of energy, then couple to the source of energy and actually extract work. If there is a relation such that diverse and complex features of nonequilibrium systems useful as sources of energy can best be detected by equally diverse and complex structures, then there appears to be some generalized “autocatalytic” set of processes in the universe since the big bang, and in a biosphere, by which nonequilibrium systems of increasing complexity and diversity arise, provide sources of energy of increasing subtlety and complexity, and in turn are detected and extracted by the increasingly complex structures that arise.
Of course, to hint the above is to hint an initial answer. At least in our bio-sphere, the cumulative coevolution of autonomous agents has, in the past four billion years, achieved precisely such a diversification. Cells and organisms have achieved astonishingly ramified and subtle detectors that measure sources of energy, plus coupling devices, that extract work and use it to build rough copies of themselves. Thus, metabolism in cells is a coupled web of chemical reactions among simple, complex, and very complex organic molecules, ranging from carbon dioxide to proteins comprised of thousands of amino acids. The catalytic sites of enzymes possess high stereospecificity  that is, shape specificity  for the transition state of the substrate(s) of the reaction. Such reactions may release energy or may couple the release of energy to the endergonic synthesis of other molecular species. Cells are replete with equally stunning receptor complexes decorating their surfaces. Binding a ligand to a receptor may trigger a complicated sequence of reactions leading to the synthesis of hundreds of dierent molecular species. But the high specificity of molecular interactions in a cell are precise examples of the coming into existence of richly nuanced, structurally and procedurally complex molecular processes that measure and detect sources of energy, and couple those sources to the carrying out of further chemical, electrical, or mechanical work.
A coevolving biosphere achieves exactly the emergence of such self-constructing diversifying organization. Whether galaxies, planetary, stellar, or other systems do as well is an open question. Again, one senses the possibility of a statistical theory of the propagation and self-elaboration of such linked structure transformational systems.
Work
Let’s turn to the concept of “work.”
I have detailed evidence that work is a puzzling concept. I am deeply proud that Phil Anderson, one of the world’s best physicists, is a close friend. One day over an Indian dinner in Santa Fe, thinking of the issues above and of more to come, I said, “Phil, the concept of work is rather puzzling.” Phil cracked o a bit of chapati, scooped some chutney onto it, paused, and said, “Yes.”
Thank God. I’m not a physicist, so I was glad to get through that hurdle.
I shall proceed in steps. First, let’s just consider the physicist’s definition of work as the integral of force acting through distance. The physicist has in mind something like Newton’s laws, where F = MA. And we understand distance, plain old nonrelativistic distance. So the work done is given by just adding up little increments of the force acting on a mass and accelerating it through a distance.
But already there is a bit of a puzzle. In any specific case of work done, some direction of application of force is specified in three-dimensional space, some actual direction of motion of the mass is specified in three-dimensional space, and some actual coupling mechanism is in place such that the force does act on the mass and get it to accelerate in that direction. How does the “specification” of a direction come to be? How does the organization of the specific case of work come about?
Now in normal physics, say, college-level physics, all these specifications occur at the beginning of the problem, in the statement of the initial and boundary conditions. The billiard balls are in such and such positions on the billiard table, the cue is moved with such and such velocity and strikes a given ball in such and such a position with such and such velocity. Now, given Newton’s calculus, let us compute the forward trajectory of the balls on the table. So the puzzle of where the initial and boundary conditions come from, and the specific coupling of cue to ball, are “hidden” in the initial and boundary conditions of “the problem” and in how Newton taught us to calculate. In short, the problem of the organization of the process in any specific case of work is hidden from view in the initial and boundary conditions of the usual statement of the physical problem. In eect, this choice is the choice of the “relevant” degrees of freedom, which is equivalent to the choice of the boundary conditions versus the dynamical variables of the system.
But an evolving biosphere is all about the coming into existence in the universe of the complex, diversifying ever-changing initial and boundary conditions that constitute coevolving autonomous agents, with their changing organization of capacities to measure and detect energy sources, and couple those detected energy sources to systems that sometimes extract work. We will return in a subsequent chapter to ask if it makes sense to try to finitely prestate the initial and boundary conditions of a biosphere. I will claim that it does not. I will claim that we cannot finitely prespecify the configuration space of a biosphere, hence, we cannot finitely prespecify the initial and boundary conditions of a biosphere.
If so, then we cannot hide the issue of the organization of work processes in a statement of the initial and boundary conditions of the biosphere. We must grapple with the emergence and propagation of organization itself on its own terms. If so, perhaps there is something amiss with the way Newton taught us to do science in his spectacular career.
Let’s take a second look at work. Consider an isolated thermodynamic system. At equilibrium the system can do no work. But let the system be partitioned into two or more domains, say, by a membrane. Ah, then one part of the system can do work on the other part. For example, if the average pressure in one part is higher than in another part, the first part can bulge the membrane into the second part.
Where did the membrane come from? How does the system come to be partitioned? Is this just another initial or boundary condition hiding from view the question: Where did this organization of stu and process come from? Meanwhile, note that the concept of work appears to require that the universe be partitioned. Regions of the universe must be distinguished (by what or whom?) such that work manages to happen.
Now I come to a definition I like, due to Atkins in his book on the second law. Atkins defines work as “the constrained release of energy.” Work is, says Atkins, a “thing.”
Think about the cylinder and piston in the idealized Carnot cycle, with the hot, compressed working gas in the chamber. What are the constraints? The cylinder and the piston, the position of the piston in the cylinder, the grease between the piston and cylinder are constraints. These roughly suce, together with the hot gas compressed in the cylinder head, for work to happen as the hot gas expands and pushes on the piston.
Where did these constraints come from? In actual fact, in the current case some human, or some machine made by a human, did work to construct the cylinder, the piston, assemble the piston into the cylinder with working gas and grease in place. Then more work was done to compress and heat the gas by pushing on the piston from the outside.
So we appear to come to an interesting circle. It sometimes takes work to construct constraints, and it takes constraints to get work.
Does it always take work to construct constraints? No, as we will soon see. Does it often take work to construct constraints? Yes. In those cases, the work done to construct constraints is, in fact, another coupling of spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes. But this is just what we are suggesting must occur in autonomous agents. In the universe as a whole, exploding from the big bang into this vast diversity, are many of the constraints on the release of energy that have formed due to a linking of spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes? Yes. What might this be about? I’ll say it again. The universe is full of sources of energy. Nonequilibrium processes and structures of increasing diversity and complexity arise that constitute sources of energy and that measure, detect, and capture those sources of energy, build new structures that constitute constraints on the release of energy, and hence drive nonspontaneous processes to create more such diversifying and novel processes, structures, and energy sources.
I find it delightful that we hardly have the concepts to state these issues; surely we have as yet no coherent theory for this burgeoning of process and structure. Whatever it is, a biosphere does it. It was quite barren in Nebraska, wherever Nebraska was, four billion years ago. Not now.
Propagating Work
By way of whimsy, consider Figures .a and .b. Figure .a exhibits a cannon, clearly marked “cannon,” firing a cannonball, clearly marked “cannonball,” that hits the ground some distance away, creating a hole, clearly marked “hole.” In addition to creating the hole, the cannonball, now embedded in the bottom of the hole, has created hot dirt, marked “hot dirt.”
In Figure .b I exhibit a device  a Rube Goldberg device, in fact  of which I am extremely proud. The same cannon as in .a now fires the same cannonball, which, however, hits a paddle on a sturdy paddle wheel I constructed. Once struck by the cannonball, the paddle wheel is set to spinning. Prior to my firing the cannonball, I contrived to tie one end of a red rope around the axle of the paddle wheel and a modest size bucket to the other end of the rope. Thereafter, I dropped the bucket down the well. The water-filled bucket has now rested, silent and waiting, until the cannonball strikes the paddle wheel, whereupon the wheel spins, the red rope winds up, pulling the water-filled bucket up the well, up against the axle, which tilts the bucket over  you will have to imagine this part  and pours the water into a long funnel that slopes down from the wellhead toward my bean field. When the water from the bucket arrives at the bottom of the water pipe, it pushes against a flap valve, thereby opening the valve and watering my bean field. You can see why I might be proud of my machine.
What is the dierence between .a and .b? The point of the cannon and cannonball in the two figures is to emphasize that there is the same total input of energy into the two cases. The explosion of gunpowder is evidently the same, as is the flight of the cannonball. Obviously, in Figure .a, most of the energy carried by the cannonball is dissipated as heat, random molecular motions induced in the particles of dirt. Indeed, I might have sent the cannonball bouncing along a large steel plate rather than hitting mere dirt. In the case of the plate, no hole would have formed, and hot steel would have been the consequence.
In Figure .b, my Rube Goldberg device achieves a rudimentary  or sophisticated, depending upon pride of inventorship  propagation of macroscopic consequences in the universe. Note the linking of spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes  the arc of the cannonball imparting energy that winds the wheel and lifts the water-filled bucket. Note also the constraints everywhere present that coordinate the flow of energy into the specific, if slightly comical, unfolding of events.
In fact, my fine Rube Goldberg device does not quite demonstrate all I might wish it to show, for it does not demonstrate the use of the release of energy to actually construct constraints. However, an ingenious modification of my device, of which I am also deeply proud, demonstrates constraint construction. Let us modify the device such that the cannonball, after hitting the paddle wheel and setting it spinning, is deflected downward onto the ground and digs a long shallow groove in the dirt, with high sides due to the displaced dirt. Let this groove lead to the bean field and guide the water spilled from the bucket such that it flows to water the bean field. The digging of the groove in the dirt by the cannonball constitutes the construction of constraints on the release of energy, for the water flowing down the gravitational potential to the bean field is just such a constrained release of energy.
My Rube Goldberg device propagates work; it succeeds in creating a sequence of coordinated macroscopic changes in the physical universe. I do not know a formal definition of “propagating work,” so, in the absence of anything better, I will point at what I mean by Figure .b.
We have some clues in place now. Work is the constrained release of energy. Often constraints themselves are the consequence of work. I have tentatively defined an autonomous agent as a self-reproducing system that carries out at least one work cycle. In turn, this led us to note that an autonomous agent is necessarily a nonequilibrium device, therefore, that it stores energy. To think about work cycles, we have been driven to ask about Maxwell’s demon, measurement, when and why measurement pays, thence to what features of a nonequilibrium system are measured such that they constitute a source of energy, thence to how couplings arise that capture the energy source, thence to work and constraints, and now to propagating work due to the occurrence of linked sets of constraints and flows of matter and energy.
A next step is to realize that the only well-known autonomous agents, namely real cells such as yeast, bacteria, your cells and mine, do actually carry out linked processes in which spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes are coupled to build constraints on the release of energy. The energy, once released, constitutes work that propagates to carry out more work, building more constraints on the release of energy, which when released constitutes work that propagates further.
Figure . is a schematic representation of a cell. The figure shows a typical bilipid membrane, small organic molecules of dierent species, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, a transmembrane channel, and so forth. Now, in fact, your cell typically does thermodynamic work to build up lipids from smaller molecular species. Typically, the energy is supplied by breakdown of ATP to ADP or similar exergonic reactions in metabolism. But lipids have the capacity to fall to a low energy structure, which is precisely a bilipid layer. As noted in chapter , lipids are molecules with a hydrophobic tail and a hydrophilic head. The hydrophilic head, as the name implies, likes water. Consequently, in an aqueous environment lipids will tend to form bilipid membranes with the hydrophilic heads facing the aqueous medium and the hydrophobic tails buried next to one another, away from the water. In fact, if you take some cholesterol, or another lipid or lipidlike molecule, and dissolve it in water, bilayer membrane vesicles form spontaneously that are called liposomes. So, your cells do thermodynamic work to make lipids, which spontaneously form a low-energy structure, the membrane.
But the membrane constitutes constraints. Watch. A and B are small organic molecular species and are capable of three hypothetical reactions. A and B can undergo a two substrate–two product reaction to form C and D. A and B can ligate to form a single product, E. Or A and B can undergo a dierent two substrate–two product reaction to form F and G. Naturally, each of these three reaction pathways from A and B passes along its own reaction coordinates through its own dierent “transition state.” Because each of the three transition states has a higher energy than does A and B or the products C and D or E or F and G, the transition state energy is a potential energy barrier, slowing the reaction from A and B down any of the three reaction pathways.
Let A and B dissolve in the bilipid membrane from the aqueous interior of the “cell.” Once this happens, immersion of A and B in the membrane environment alters the vibrational, rotational, and translational motions, or “degrees of freedom,” of A and B. But, in turn, these alterations in the motions of A and B alter the heights of the transition state energies along each of the three reaction pathways from A and B to C and D or to E or to F and G.
But the alteration in potential energy heights along the three dierent reaction pathways from A and B is precisely the alteration of the constraints on these reactions. The barrier heights, together with the even higher energy barriers that provide the walls of the reaction coordinates along which the reaction proceeds, constitute the constraints. So, in fact, the cell has actually done thermodynamic work to construct constraints on the release of chemical energy stored in A and B, that might be released to form C and D or E or F and G.
Moreover, the cell does thermodynamic work, utilizing ATP degradation to ADP, to link amino acids together into a protein enzyme. The enzyme diuses to the A-and-B-laden region of the membrane and binds stereospecifically to the transition state leading from A and B to the products C and D. By binding the transition state complex of this reaction pathway, the enzyme lowers the potential barrier for the A + B ÷ C + D reaction, and the chemical energy stored in A + B is released to form C + D.
Thus the cell does work, both to construct constraints and to modify those constraints, by raising or lowering potential barriers such that chemical energy is released. More, the released energy can, and often does, propagate to do work constructing more constraints. Thus, the product D may itself diuse to a transmembrane channel and bind to the channel, giving up some energy stored in its structure by an internal rotation to a lower energy state, and thereby both bind the channel and add energy to the channel to open the channel such that calcium ions can enter the cell. A spontaneous and a nonspontaneous process are coupled. Work propagates in cells and often does so by the construction of constraints on the release of energy, which when released constitutes work that propagates to construct more constraints on the release of energy.
Records
Let’s turn to the concept of a “record.” As we saw, Zurek has led us to the point, in thinking about Maxwell’s demon, at which a record of measurements might be kept and used later to extract work. In the case of a nonequilibrium system, in principle, measurements of a system might pay in the sense that more work could be extracted from the system  which now becomes a provider of energy  than need be used to record and later erase the measurement.
Interestingly, the “erasure cost” suggests that autonomous agents must be finitely displaced from equilibrium to aord the finite erasure cost and still reproduce. In addition, of course, rapid reproduction requires finite displacement from equilibrium.
We have many colloquial notions of a record. I want to try a tentative technical definition: Records are correlated macroscopic states that identify sources of energy that can be tapped to extract work.
Thus, we are to think of records as recording “measurements” that identify the source(s) of energy in the measured system, which may then be tapped to do work. My example of the wind through the window in Maxwell’s two-chambered gas system is a case in point. We have good grounds from Zurek’s work to believe that the complexity of the record is related to the reduction in entropy of the measured system.
Notice some interesting features of records. First, a useless feature of a nonequilibrium system with respect to extraction of work may be recorded. Second, errors may be made in the record of a useful feature of a nonequilibrium system from which work can be extracted. Third, the record may go out of date, so that work can no longer be extracted by reference to the record. Fourth, the record may be erased and may be updated. All the above features arise in a coevolving microbial community. Indeed, all sorts of signaling pathways in cells record and report energy sources and coordinate cellular activities within and between cells in a community. Mutation, recombination, and selection are means to update the recording devices with respect to changing sources of energy, opportunity, and danger. Again we see that cells in a community have the embodied know-how to get on with making a living.
We are struggling with a circle of concepts involving work, constraint, constraint construction, propagating work, measurements, couplings, energy, records, matter, processes, events, information, and organization. It has been said by many that we do not understand the linking of matter, energy, and information. The circle above points at something we must trouble ourselves to understand, and I suspect that the triad of matter, energy, and information is insucient. Rather, the missing “something” concerns organization. While we have, it seems, adequate concepts of matter, energy, entropy, and information, we lack a coherent concept of organization, its emergence, and self-constructing propagation and self-elaboration.
If we do not yet understand organization fully, we can at least think about what happens in autonomous agents such as real cells. A real cell, a real molecular autonomous agent, does in fact carry out self-reproduction. In addition, it carries out one or more real work cycles, linking spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes. It does, in fact, measure, detect, and record sources of energy and does do work to construct constraints on the release of energy, which when released in the constrained way, propagates to do more work, often constructing further constraints on the release of energy or doing work by driving further nonspontaneous processes. Cells do achieve propagating work.
The work propagating in a cell achieves a “closure” in a set of propagating work tasks such that the cell literally constructs a rough copy of itself. In a later chapter I will return to discussing “tasks,” which turn out on a Darwinian analysis to be a subset of the causal consequences of the release of energy at a point and time in the system. For the moment, I want to focus on the concept of a closure in a set of propagating “work tasks.”
We know what it means to cook dinner, eat dinner, and clean up afterward. A coordinated set of activities is carried out that completes the events concerning preparing, eating, and cleaning up after dinner. The notion of completing a set of tasks is not mystical. So we can straightforwardly state that a cell completes a set of propagating work tasks such that it builds a copy of itself by linking spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes in constrained ways.
Thus, a molecular autonomous agent achieves two dierent closures. First, it achieves a “catalytic” closure; all the reactions that must be catalyzed are catalyzed by molecular members of the system. Second, it achieves a closure in a set of propagating work tasks by which it completes the construction of a rough copy of itself. Cells achieve this work-task closure, nor is there anything nonobjective about this truth.
Notice that the closure in catalytic and work tasks cannot be defined “locally.” No single reaction, no single linking of spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes typically suces to specify the closures we are describing. These closures are typically collective properties of the entire autonomous agent in its environment. In fact, cells achieve closure in some wider range of tasks by which they propagate their organization. Thus, cells carry out measurements and record them all the time. The bacterium swimming upstream in a glucose gradient was my initial candidate example of an autonomous agent. The bacterium does so by molecular “sensors” that measure glucose, a molecular motor with a stator and a rotor that can rotate in either direction, and a flagellum that can rotate in two directions, causing “swimming” in one direction and “tumbling” in the other. The cell achieves swimming “upstream” by continuing to swim if the glucose concentration is rising and tumbling then swimming in a random direction if not.
Autonomous agents achieve catalytic and propagating work-task closures by which they build copies of themselves. The myriad sensors, receptors, ligands, enzymes, and linked reactions of metabolism are the structure and dynamic of the reproducing cellular autonomous agent that constitutes the measurement, detection, recording, and search for useful energy sources to link into its ongoing construction of itself. The propagating closure of events and organization that is a cell or colony of cells, an autonomous agent, or a collection of autonomous agents is not matter alone, energy alone, entropy alone, nor the negation of entropy, Shannon’s information, alone. The propagating closure that is an autonomous agent appears to be a new physical concept that we have not known how to see before.
What we can here see is the natural embodiment of organization. We have, I suggest, no coherent concept of organization. We have tended to think that the concept of entropy, of order and disorder in statistical arrangements of states of aairs, is the proper and central concept of organization. But I claim that entropy is not yet adequate. Nowhere does entropy cover the topics we have discussed, the closure of catalysis and propagating work tasks creating the complete whole that is an autonomous agent coevolving in a biosphere. This closure of tasks, measurements, records, and linkages that propagates macroscopic work seems to constitute at least an ostensive definition, a definition by example, of “organization.”
Although my discussion above about organization is still preliminary, the basic points seem correct. A coevolving mixed microbial community that existed some three billion years ago, diversifying and coevolving via Darwinian mutation, recombination, and natural selection, did, in fact, measure and detect and create an increasing variety of energy sources, did, in fact, couple those detected energy sources into work cycles and other activities, and did, in fact, build a biosphere. Self-constructing organization did and does propagate. Our globe is covered by this propagating organization  life and its consequences.
Indeed, it seems important to wonder which conditions in a nonequilibrium universe would allow such propagating organization to proliferate. A biosphere does it, of course. One can imagine a watery planet with small sail boats, sails, and tillers trimmed to tack forever on a left tack, forever circling the everywhere ocean. Here the sails and tiller match the windmill and its vane, orienting the fan to capture the transient wind and extract mechanical work. Intuitively, it seems unlikely that such a planet of nonliving complex entities could have arisen spontaneously since the big bang. Just as intuitively, all we have discussed seems sucient for the ongoing diversification of propagating organization: the Darwinian processes of natural selection and random variation, the coevolutionary construction of vastly complex autonomous-agent cell systems that continually evolve ever-novel measurements of novel sources of energy, recordings of those energy sources, couplings to those sources, constraint construction, and the linking of exergonic and endergonic reactions that builds the diversifying biosphere.
The biosphere is the most rambunctiously complex, integrated, diversifying, milling, buzzing, busyness in the universe that we know. Perhaps there are other biospheres, and they too hum in persistent diversification. Autonomous agents appear to be a sucient condition for application of this concept of organization, and a biosphere comprised of coevolving autonomous agents appears to be a sucient condition for propagating self-constructing organization. It remains an open question whether other structures and processes in the universe that may not be autonomous agents  say, lifeless galaxies, stars, the giant molecular clouds in galaxies, or lifeless planets  can generate and propagate diversifying organization as radically well as do biospheres.
I close this chapter by asking whether there is a way to “mathematize” the concept of an autonomous agent and, through it, the concept of propagating organization. The answer is, perhaps, category theory. I am honored to note, in memorium, that my friend and colleague Robert Rosen first explored some of these issues and some others of those touched upon here in his book Life Itself.
Category theory is a branch of mathematics concerning mappings. Consider a “domain” and a “range.” A mapping takes points in the domain to points in the range. The mappings might be :, or :many, or many:. For example, in a : mapping, each point in the domain maps to a single corresponding point in the range. The domain and range can be discrete sets or continuous.
An interesting feature of categories is that a category can have the property that the mapping from the domain to the range is specified by the category itself in a recursive way; the elements of the range determine the mapping from the domain to the range. This recursive specification comes close to an autocatalytic set. We need merely think of a set of molecular species in the domain and a set of molecular species in the range; the mapping from domain to range is just the set of reactions that transform the initial “substrate molecules” in the domain to the “product molecules” in the range. Now, an autocatalytic set has the property that certain product molecules in the range, namely the products that are also catalysts, “choose” the reactions that are catalyzed from the substrates to the products, hence, choose the specific mapping from the domain to the range. Thus, an autocatalytic set can be thought of as this kind of recursive category.
The category theory image is at least a start with respect to catalytic closure. Perhaps some enhanced category theory that includes closures of work tasks, measurements, and records, as well as catalysis, is part of what an adequate formalization of “autonomous agent” may be. It is too early to say.
On the other hand, I am not persuaded that category theory will suce. In category theory it seems necessary to specify ahead of time all the possible domains and ranges and mappings under consideration. I will suggest in a later chapter when we consider the evolution of novelties that there is no finite prespecification for the work tasks, measurements, records, and catalytic tasks that might constitute autonomous agents. In short, I will argue that we cannot prestate the configuration space of a biosphere. Whether an incapacity to prestate the configuration space of a biosphere genuinely precludes the use of category theory to mathematize the concepts of autonomous agents and propagating organization is an open question.
We have arrived at this: An autonomous agent, or a collection of them in an environment, is a nonequilibrium system that propagates some new union of matter, energy, constraint construction, measurement, record, information, and work. It is a new organization of process and events. The collective behaviors of coevolving autonomous agents have, over the past four billion years, constructed a biosphere. If life is common, the elaboration of biospheres in the universe is rife. The propagating union of work cum record cum measurement cum constraint construction, the propagation of organization unfolding and diversifying, exhibits the very creativity of the universe. We are entitled to ask whether there may be general laws governing such nonequilibrium self-constructive processes in biospheres and the universe as a whole. I return to candidate general laws in chapters and .




Chapter 5
A Physics of Semantics?
ach of the chapters of Investigations broaches new territory. Each is tentative and incomplete, pointing but not fully adequate. Yet, I persistently hope, it is better to light one candle against   .   .   .   what? the darkness? the veil beyond which we have had no framework of questions before? There are grounds, reasoned about by the best of philosophers and scientists of the past several centuries, to doubt a physics of semantics. We are on shaky ground. Yet when the first hard frost comes, when the birches have been swung, their crimson leaves scattered carelessly, when crystals splint shallow ponds and old egrets stand dark watch the coming dawn, long-legged, knowing how winter is thin, when the first phase transition of water to ice forms slight solidity across meadow streams, small creatures of flesh and concept tiptoe gingerly to some far side where, perhaps, something new is to be found.
We have lacked a physical definition of an autonomous agent, able to manipulate the universe on its own behalf  the egret whose foreboding of winter leads to lifted wing and steady, powerful flight. The egret is as much a part of physical reality as the atom, and perhaps more than the vaunted quark. But autonomous agents, we who do daily manipulate the world on our own behalf, we to whom “intentionality” and “purpose” are so inevitably attributed by our common languages, we are, by my definition of autonomous agents, also nothing but physical systems with a peculiar organization of processes and properties. If the concept of autonomous agents were something like a useful  or more, a proper  definition of life itself, then autonomous agents span the gap from the merely physical to that new realm of the merely physical where “purpose” is ascribed by all of us to one another.
Semantics enters with purpose. For this to be true, it is not necessary that the carriers of purpose, say, the same bacterium heading upstream in the glucose gradient, be conscious.
I hope my definition of an autonomous agent is useful, an autocatalytic system carrying out a work cycle, now rather broadened by the realization that autonomous agents also do often detect and measure and record displacements of external systems from equilibrium that can be used to extract work, then do extract work, propagating work and constraint construction, from their environment.
Know-how
Bring ourselves empathetically and objectively back three billion years to the mixed microbial community flourishing right about where most of us are now, plus or minus a modicum of layers of surface crustal material.
I want to say that the autonomous agents comprising that community had, individually and collectively, the embodied know-how to get on with making a living in the natural games that constituted their world. Indeed, as I have emphasized before, a biosphere is a self-consistent coconstruction of autonomous agents, ways of making a living, and the search procedures, mutation, recombination, as well as behavioral search open to autonomous agents. Those means of making a living that were well searched out and mastered by the agents and their search procedures became the kinds of “jobs” that were widely filled, the abundant niches of the bio-sphere. There is in this whole self-constructing system a wider know-how, beyond the know-how of any single autonomous agent spinning eagerly in its microenvironment. Yet, clearly, the know-how is distributed. There is no autonomous agent, no one, who knows how the whole system works, any more than anyone at present knows how the global economic system works in its myriad interactions, deals, steals, hopes, and frustrations.
What in the world is “know-how”? Philosophers distinguish between “know-how” and “know that.” I know how to tie my shoes and am learning how to play jazz drums. “Know that” concerns propositions, most conveniently, human propositions. I know that the moon is  they tell me  not made of green cheese. I know that the earth circles the sun, that the earth is roughly spherical, that chairs are used to sit on. “Know that” brings with it the standard and nonstandard issues of the truth or falseness of propositions as they report states of the world. Perhaps higher primates who are trained to manipulate simple symbols with apparent reference to the world also can “know that” with respect to propositions.
Unlike “know that,” “know-how” does not involve propositions about the world. “Know-how” involves procedural knowledge about how to get on in the world. The cheetah streaking after the wildebeest, the athletic genius high jumping, have the know-how to do it.
Does a bacterium know how to make a living in its world? I certainly want to say yes, without attributing consciousness in any way. Watch the myriad subtle turnings on and o of genes, metabolic switching, mechanical twitching, sensing of glucose gradient, swimming and tumbling upstream to higher glucose concentrations. It knows how all right, even if it cannot talk about how it gets on with its business. But then, try to talk about tying your shoes or the skilled driving when you become aware some dozens of miles down the road that you have accomplished the tasks without paying the slightest focused attention.
Thank God for know-how. Know that is a thin veneer on a four-billion-year-old know-how skill abundant in the biosphere. But any autonomous agent proliferating alone or in a congery of other agents, it would seem, is also graced by the selfsame know-how. If we synthesize autonomous agents in the next decades and they coevolve under our rapt gaze over months or years into a modestly complex ecosystem brimming with novel life forms, they too will know how to make a living in their mutually created world plus the boundary conditions we more or less intelligently impose on them.
The know-how is, in these terms, nothing but another view of the propagating closures of catalysis, work tasks, sensing, recording, and acting that we now recognize as inherent in the doings of autonomous agents. The know-how is not outside that propagating organization. The know-how is the propagating organization.
Semantics
All of which brings us, inevitably, to the brink of semantics.
It is simple at its roots, you see. An incoming molecular species arriving in the interior of an autonomous agent really is (i) food; (ii) poison; (iii) a signal; (iv) neutral; (v) something else. 
Once there is an autonomous agent, there is a semantics from its privileged point of view. The incoming molecule is “yuck” or “yum.” I think the major conceptual step to yuck or yum is unavoidable once there is an autonomous agent. And I think we have roughly the Darwinian criteria in mind. If yum, then there will probably be more of this type of agent, osprings of the first. If yuck, it is not so likely this lineage will prosper.
Once yuck and yum, we are not far from C. S. Pierce’s meaning-laden semiotic triad: sign, signified, significans. Like it or not, the glucose gradient is a sign, a predictor, of “more glucose that way.” Granted, the glucose is not an arbitrary symbol, any more than a cloud is an arbitrary symbol of rain. In this restricted sense, signs are causally correlated with that which is signified. By contrast, the relation between the word “chair” and that which it signifies, and on which I am now sitting, is arbitrary. But can chemical signals in bacterial and plant and human communities be arbitrary from a chemical causal point of view? If so, can “mere chemicals” be signs in the full Piercean sense?
I believe it is clear that mere chemistry in an autonomous agent can harbor symbols and signs in the full senses of the words. Consider first the famous genetic code. Triplets of nucleotides in an RNA molecule stand for specific amino acids that will end up incorporated into a protein. The detailed causal machinery involves transfer RNA molecules with their anticodon site and the distant site to which amino acids are attached, the aminoacyle transferase enzymes that charge the amino acid binding site of each transfer RNA with the proper amino acid among the twenty amino acids, the binding of the charged transfer RNA’s anticodon site to the proper RNA code word triplet, the ribosome that glides between adjacent charged transfer RNA molecules and links the successive amino acids into the growing polypeptide chain that hangs free in the cytoplasm, tethered by the ribosome to the messenger RNA molecule as it is “translated.”
The arbitrariness of the genetic code is exemplified by the evolution of novel transfer RNA molecules, which translate a given messenger RNA code word triplet into a dierent amino acid. As J. Monod properly emphasized three decades ago in a slightly dierent context concerning activation and inhibition of enzymes at allosteric sites on the enzyme that are distant from the catalytic site, the relation of chemical structures that achieve control of catalysis are utterly arbitrary with respect to the chemical structures that undergo the catalysis. The same is true of the transfer RNA where the anticodon site is distant from the amino acid binding site. Because of this, which amino acid is charged onto a particular transfer RNA is utterly arbitrary and controlled by the aminoacyle transferase enzyme that does the charging, plus the structure of the amino acid binding site on the transfer RNA. Both of these can be altered without altering the anticodon-codon matching mechanism. In short, chemistry allows arbitrary organizations of control relations.
It seems fully legitimate to assign the concepts of sign, signified, and significans to the genetic code. It seems legitimate to extend that notion to much of the subtle signaling, chemical and otherwise, within and between autonomous agents, as exemplified by plants that upon infestation by a particular insect secrete a secondary metabolite chemical that “warns” other members of the same species that an insect infestation is happening and to turn on defensive anti-insect secondary metabolites.
The calculus that is Claude Shannon’s elegant information theory has always been about reduction of uncertainty about the statistics of the source of a set of symbols. Nowhere in the core of Shannon’s work concerning the encoding and transmission of information does the meaning, or semantics, of the information enter. This is no criticism, and is widely known and appreciated. There is, however, just a hint of semantics in Shannon’s view that the semantics resides in the “decoder.”
I cannot buy Shannon’s view unless the decoder is an autonomous agent. If not, then the decoder merely transforms a bit string sent along a communication channel into some other discrete or continuous dynamics  perhaps a set of water-filled bowls is drained by turning on a machine that opens valves between the bowls and to the outside world in particular ways. The patterns of bowl drainage upon receipt of the binary string messages sent along the communication channel constitutes the decoding.
But if the recipient is an autonomous agent such as a bacterium and the incoming molecule is a symbol-sign of a paramecium or an amoeba on the roam and the bacterium swims away and avoids becoming dinner, that sequence of events seems laden with semantics. If only the bacterium could tell us: “Did you see that truck of a paramecium coming at me? I’ve run into that one before! I ducked under a boulder, and he never sensed me. I made it home. Pass me some more glucose please, Martha.”
I will return in the next chapter to discuss such stories, for I will say that we cannot prestate the configuration space of a biosphere and, therefore, cannot deduce that which will unfold. Thus, among other things, we must tell stories to understand the oriented actions of agents in their worlds. Do not be overly quick to accuse me of anthropomorphizing. I too know the risks, including the common claim that we can always in principle translate from “intentional talk” to the fully predictive causal account of the events in question. But patience. Not only are we unable to prestate the configuration space of a biosphere and predict what will unfold, but we also cannot even translate  in the sense of necessary and sucient conditions  from legal talk to normal intentional talk, let alone from legal talk of Henderson found guilty of murder to a physical talk about sound-wave forms monitored and masses at space-time lines as a description.
Then let’s just be naive for the moment. The semantics of the yuck or yum coming into a simple autonomous agent  say, an early bacterium  is somehow linked with the embodied know-how of that agent in making a living, or failing to make a living, in its world. The semantics of an event is some subset of the fully embroidered, context-dependent set of causal implications of the event, or signal, in question.
“For want of a nail, the shoe was lost; for want of the shoe, the horse was lost; and for want of the horse, the rider was lost,” more or less, said Benjamin Franklin. The semantics of the nail is some subset of this embroidered context-dependent set of implications of the event, or signal, in question to the autonomous agents in the coevolving system.
It seems hard to ascribe purpose, in the sense of acting on its own behalf, to a stone or a chair and easy with respect to an alga. Of course, there is a sense in which my attribution of semantics to autonomous agents is purely tautological. After all, I began by stating that a bacterium swimming upstream in the glucose gradient was acting on its own behalf in an environment, defined an autonomous agent as a physical system able to act on its own behalf, then asked what a physical system must be such that it can act on its own behalf. Now, five chapters later, it is hardly an independent deduction that autonomous agents are the proposed organization of matter, energy, and organization to which purposes can be ascribed in the sense of being able to act on their own behalf. My definition is a definitional circle.
On the other hand, while the definition is circular, like F = MA and Darwin’s “natural selection” and “fitness,” that does not mean that the set of codefined concepts surrounding my definition of an autonomous agent as a reproducing system that does a work cycle fails to touch the real world. Stones and chairs are not, by my definition, autonomous agents. All living cells are. And the stunning fact directly before us, every day, is that autonomous agents do manipulate the world on their own behalf. Watch a pair of nesting birds build their nest.
In short, once we have autonomous agents and yuck and yum, it appears that semantics enters the universe as the agents coevolve and behave on their own behalf with one another in the unfolding of a biosphere.
Knowing
What about “knowing”?
Daniel Dennett, in his fine book Darwin’s Dangerous Idea, advances a hierarchy of forms of “knowing,” if I may use that term, that have arisen in evolution by Darwinian means. I find his hierarchy congenial and informative. Dennett envisions evolution as a sequence of kinds of construction cranes that bit by bit build up higher-order entities via variation and natural selection.
I do not disagree, although I have placed far greater emphasis on the roles of self-organization in evolution. Here, in Investigations, I am trying to point at the mysterious but utterly natural hopefulness in which an increasing diversity of broken symmetries in the universe creates the diversity of structures and processes that can constitute and identify ramified and ramifying sources of energy, detect those sources of energy, create devices and processes that couple to those sources of energy, and generate yet more diversity that propagates macroscopic order even further. I wonder, in short, at the naturalness and self-generaticity of Dennett’s cranes building cranes building cranes in biospheres, perhaps planetary geologies, and beyond.
But back to the past. Dennett distinguishes “Darwinian creatures,” “Pavlovian creatures,” “Popperian creatures,” and “Gregorian creatures.” A simple autonomous agent, say, a bacterium, is a Darwinian creature. In its simplest version, the creature evolves by mutation, also recombination and natural selection. For the moment, no behavioral learning is to be considered. So one (or a colony or an ecosystem) of Darwinian creatures adapts more or less as Darwin told us.
At the next level up, say, aplysia, a nervous system is present, and the creature is capable of stimulus-response learning, à la Pavlov. Indeed, aplysia can learn very simple conditioned stimuli  the later analogue is the bell causing the dog to salivate in “expectation” of food.
At the next level (Dennett, perhaps properly, reserves this for us vertebrates) is the Popperian creature. Popperian creatures, in Dennett’s fine phrase, have “internal models” of their world and can “run the internal model” with the clutch disengaged, rather than running the model in real time in the real world. This allows us lucky Popperian creatures to allow our “hypotheses to die in our stead.” I love that image.
Beyond the Popperian is the Gregorian creature  namely, at least humans. Dennett makes the wonderful argument that we utilize our tools  literally stone knives, arrows, digging sticks, machine tools  to enlarge our shared world of facts and processes. This enlarged shared world gives us more know-how, and more know that. Cultural evolution, at some point, begins to burst out-of-bounds. Hard rock music jangles the minarets of Iran. Who knows what new cultural forms will blossom? Chinese cooking lands in Cuba, and Cuban-Chinese cuisine is invented. What’s next under the sun? Who can say?
I very much like Dennett’s ladder of know-how, and eventual know that. Without invoking consciousness, not because it is not worth invoking but because so little sensible has ever been said on the subject, it seems worth asking how much of this hierarchy could be realized by simple molecular systems, even without evoking nerve cells.
I would think a lot of this hierarchy could find molecular realizations. For example, bacteria and amoebae do have a kind of Pavlovian learning already, for they have receptors that accommodate to a constant level of a given signal ligand and sense instead a change from the current level. This is not yet the association of a more or less arbitrary conditioned stimulus with an unconditioned stimulus, but I can imagine chemistry to accomplish the latter. As neurons are supposed to proliferate and form novel synaptic connections that survive if used and to mediate the linkage of conditioned to unconditioned stimulus, why not envision a complex chemistry, say, very complex carbohydrate-synthesis patterns sustained by complex sets of enzymes whose activities are modulated by the dierent carbohydrates themselves, which is true of contemporary carbohydrate metabolism. Such a system might blindly try out variant patterns of synthesis until it could establish a self-sustaining web linking the carbohydrates, the enzymes, and certain protein receptors mediating the linkage between unconditioned and conditioned stimulus, then maintain that linkage by positive feedback loops. The image is not too far from how it is imagined that “idiotype” and “anti-idiotype” immune networks work to sustain synthesis of a set of desired antibodies against an incoming pathogen. In such networks, for which there is modestly good evidence, a given first antibody serves as an antigen that stimulates the body to produce a second antibody that binds to the unique amino acid sequences, called the “idiotype” of the first antibody. In turn, the second “anti-idiotype” antibody stimulates a third, which stimulates a fourth. But this series is likely to form feedback loops because the first and third antibody can often both bind to the same site on the second antibody, hence, the first and third antibodies are similar shapes in shape space. It is not much of a stretch to think of the immune system as a conditioned stimulus response system.
Popperian creatures? Why cannot the molecular-sensing and hypothesis-testing churning concerns of the bacterium as it senses a paramecium churn twenty cycles before kicking in the rotary motor, or not, such that the wee bacterium hides under a boulder of a grain of sand until the beast passes by? Are nerves necessary? Plants, as noted, are said to signal one another with complex secondary metabolites to characterize the particular kinds of insects infesting the glade. There are arbitrary structural relations between the metabolite and the insect, just as symbols in human language are often arbitrary with respect to the signified. Not bad for nerveless nonvertebrates.
I do get stuck at Gregorian creatures. Even here, the free and open creating of new symbol strings in a language, wherever new sentences can be created, is not that fundamentally dierent from the persistent open creation of new kinds of molecules in the biosphere as a whole. If the conversation we recent two-legged ones are having with respect to our digging sticks and atomic bombs is impressive, so too is the chemical conversation in any full-fledged ecosystem, where we are all instrumental in the lives of one another.
I suppose I am naively driven to consider that the biosphere, with its urgent diversity in which, emboldened by all our know-how, we do get on with a very rich conversation, may very early already have harbored all the levels of which Dennett speaks. We humans are just more gregarious with our vocal cords and e-mail, I guess. Smart place, a biosphere, lots to talk about. Four billion years of yammering. Slapstick comedy may have started a long time ago.
Ethics
And what of ethics? Does a whi of ethical issue arise with autonomous agents? Yuck or yum from my point of view if I am an autonomous agent. There are deep reasons for caution. Hume told us long ago about the “naturalistic fallacy”: One cannot deduce “ought” from “is.” From the fact that mothers care for their young, we cannot deduce that they ought to do so, Hume argued. From the fact that Hitler set out to conquer Europe and more and to kill Jewry, we cannot deduce that he ought to have done so.
Indeed, Hume’s injunction underlies the caution of scientists about making ethical statements. We scientists find the facts. You citizens across the globe can argue the ethics. But if Hume warns us not to deduce ought from is, where do values come from at all? Hume’s injunction against deduction from is to ought nevertheless began by recognizing the legitimacy of the category “ought.”
The eorts following Hume to understand the meaning of ethical assertions have been long, twisted, arduous. Following the dictates of the logical positivists of the Vienna Circle that only those statements capable of verification were meaningful, philosophers as famous as G. E. Moore came to wonder if ethical assertions were merely emotive utterances. “It is wrong to kill.” Becomes, “Agggah!” Does the positivist argument seem persuasive? It has always amused me that the core injunction of the logical positivists, “only those statements that are empirically verifiable are meaningful,” is itself not empirically verifiable. One is reminded of something about hoisting and petards. 
John Rawls of Harvard has argued eloquently that our human notions of fairness derive from what we would all “contractually” agree to, were we to know before birth that we would all be born with diering abilities and endowments. Thus “equality before the law” is one contract that Rawls commends to us. “Equality before the law” is far more refined than the yuck or yum of the bacterium. The emergence of ethics in the evolution of life on this planet is a fascinating issue.
I will content myself with wondering where “value” and the rudiments of “intentionality” come from in the physical universe in the first place and leave social contracts for other eorts. Where is the place of value in a world of fact? 
So, a short soliloquy. Facts are know-that statements. But know-how preceded know that. While fully aware of Hume’s injunction, I think that from the autonomous agent’s perspective, yuck or yum is primary, unavoidable, and of the deepest importance to that agent. I suppose we apply the Darwinian criteria. Too much yuck, this one and its progeny are gone from the future of the biosphere. Without attributing consciousness to an E. coli, or an autonomous agent we may create in the near future, I cannot help but feel that the rudiments of value are present once autonomous agents are around.
And again without attributing consciousness, once an autonomous agent is around is the rudiment of intentionality present? If so, another cornerstone of ethical activity has been laid. Ethical behavior requires first the logical possibility of behavior for which one is responsible. You are not responsible for acts and eects beyond your control. To act ethically, you must first be able to act at all.
But what are “acts” in the first place? Daniel Yamins is a brilliant young mathematician. Now entering Harvard, Dan spent a summer with me at the Santa Fe Institute before he learned to drive, after an earlier summer spent in the laboratory of Jack Szostak at Harvard, where, at age fourteen, Dan was learning to evolve RNA molecules to bind arbitrary ligands. Dan and I struggled that summer to make the distinction between the “doings” of an autonomous agent and mere happenings in and around the autonomous agent. Note we say the E. coli is swimming upstream in the glucose gradient to get dinner. But all sorts of molecular vibrational, rotational, and translational motions are occurring. What are actions and what are mere happenings?
I do not think we were successful in drawing a clean distinction between doings and happenings with clear mathematics. But I sense that the distinction between doings and happenings, Dan’s happy phrasing, is relevant for E. coli, tigers, us, trees, and autonomous agents in general. We will meet a similar problem in the next chapter when we attempt to distinguish between the function of a part of an organism and the other causal consequences of that part of the organism.
Strange and interesting, is it not, that these issues all seem to arise with autonomous agents but not otherwise? Granted that we here seem to confront the language game circularity alluded to earlier, yet I do truly think that the rudiments of semantics, intentionality, value, and ethics arise with autonomous agents. I do not think those rudiments suce to jump over Hume’s naturalistic fallacy. We cannot deduce ought from is in any concrete context, but I think we have the categories of ought and is in the physical universe once we have autonomous agents.





Chapter 6
Emergence and Story:
Beyond Newton, Einstein, and Bohr?
How brazen a chapter subtitle: “Beyond Newton, Einstein, and Bohr?” Yet hints we shall find, for the science of Newton, Einstein, and Bohr remains innocent of the propagating coconstructing organization of autonomous agents, of nonequilibrium systems building a biosphere. Yet surely the biosphere is part of the universe and any general laws of the universe must necessarily encompass bio-spheres here, and if a general biology is necessary, elsewhere in the vastness we glimpse.
And “emergence and story”? What manner of foolishness is this? Story? Surely story is not the stuV of science. I’m not so sure. Story is the natural way we autonomous agents talk about our raw getting on with it, mucking through, making a living. If story is not the stuV of science yet is about how we get on with making our ever-changing livings, then science, not story, must change. Our making our ever-changing livings is part of the unfolding of the physical universe.
Would you rather be Einstein or Shakespeare? I’m not sure whose genius is the more awesome. I come, hesitantly, to believe we need both science and story to make sense of a universe in which we agents, part of the universe, get on with our embodied know-how, we who strut and fret our hour upon the stage. Then are heard no more? Hardly. Our successes and failures trickle, tumble, and torrentially build the future of our biosphere. We Americans, fearful of Sputnik, land men and mass on the moon. Parting, we leave mass on the moon and thereby change the orbital dynamics of the solar system and beyond. Calculate that, Newton, genius that you were. From what initial and boundary conditions would you, could you, start?
But again, we have not had, nor have we yet, a theory of the propagating coconstructing organization that is a biosphere built of autonomous agents and their shenanigans.
Oh, confusion. Perhaps a certain confusion is healthy. We have not tried to embrace all of this at once before.
Hierarchies of Autonomous Agents
For a start, there appears to be an indefinite hierarchy of autonomous agents. At least in our biosphere, there is a considerable hierarchy of autonomous agents. Consider first a single-cell organism, prokaryote, cells without nuclei such as E. coli in your gut. E. coli, my canonical autonomous agent. Next, consider a eukaryote, yeast, also in your gut, also an autonomous agent. In the passage from prokaryote to eukaryotic cell, it appears that a collection of autonomous agents came to live together permanently. Eukaryotes contain mitochondria, and plant cells contain plastids with chlorophyll. In both cases, these intracellular organelles carry their own DNA, with a slightly modified genetic code in the case of mitochondria. These facts have suggested to Lynn Margulis the now rather well-accepted hypothesis that eukaryotic cells are symbionts of two or more earlier separate autonomous agents that contributed the mitochondria, the plastids, and perhaps the nuclear structure of eukaryotes into a single novel reproducing entity, the eukaryotic cell.
The eukaryotic cell, then, is a well-behaved society of autonomous agents that are now symbiotic, hence, the eukaryotic cell is a higher-order autonomous agent, comprised of lower-order autonomous agents.
But life has burgeoned beyond single-celled creatures. The sea is filled with eukaryotic colonial organisms = multicellular, usually capable of sexual reproduction but also capable of asexual reproduction by budding clumps of cells that reform the various organs, feeding tubes, mouths, stinging cells, musculature, nerve system. Blessed proliferating profusion of ways of being.
And of course, since about 1.6 billion years ago, and surely since the Ediacrin 600 million years ago, and the Cambrian period 540 million years ago, there have come to exist us multicellular sexually reproducing juggernauts.
Tyrannosaurus rex really was a juggernaut of an autonomous agent. A blue whale isn’t so trifling either. Neither is the wide-flung stand of aspen astride the hillsides above Santa Fe, largest single stand of aspen in the United States, presumably all or most of which is a linked set of trees sprouting from the spreading roots of some initial individual. Julius Rebek, a chemist now at the Scripps Institute, is fond of saying that the biggest molecule he knows of is Number 7 Illinois coal, a massive hunk of coal several miles long and wide and hundreds of feet deep. Maybe Number 7 Illinois coal is from a single, clonally linked stand of aspen cousins.
So we confront a hierarchy of autonomous agents. If our definition of an autonomous agent should include that it be “an individual” capable of reproducing, then maybe whales are about as big as such agents get in the current biosphere. That’s a long way up in mass and molecules from the minimal autonomous agent I sketched in chapter 3.
How far can the hierarchy go? Who knows.
Perhaps the simplest step in this hierarchy would be the hypothetical, and now almost experimentally realized, hypercycle invented by Manfred Eigen and Peter Schuster. The hypothetical hypercycle consists of a set of replicating RNA sequences, say A, B, C, and D, each of which is actually a plus and minus strand that are template complements. But in addition to A, B,C, and D each replicating individually, A helps B replicate, B helps C replicate, C helps D replicate, and D helps A replicate. Thinking of each plus/minus RNA strand pair as a replicating cycle of two template strands, these replicating cycles are linked in the ABCD hypercycle.
In fact, the hypercycle is a small society of molecular replicators that help one another replicate, hence, it is a higher-order molecular replicating system. Reza Ghadiri has nearly created a peptide hypercycle and probably soon will achieve a real experimental example. While the hypercycle of Eigen and Schuster does not yet fulfill my definition of an autonomous agent because no work cycles are done, nevertheless we have no trouble imagining a hypercycle of autonomous agents. Indeed, presumably, the eukaryotic cell is more or less just such a hypercycle.
We have beginning mathematical models that reveal something about this hierarchical organization = although the best current models are curiously limited despite their brilliance.
Walter Fontana is a theoretical chemist trained by Peter Schuster in Vienna. Walter came to the Santa Fe Institute and made a major intellectual step called “Alchemy.” In chapter 2, I described the emergence of autocatalytic sets of molecular species in a chemical reaction graph. By rather independent intellectual routes that began with physicist John McCaskill’s eVorts to create a computer soup of Turing machines that “operated” on one another, Walter invented “algorithmic chemistry.” Naturally, and most naturally in Santa Fe, where one can be healed by means known nowhere else in the universe, Walter nicknamed algorithmic chemistry “Alchemy.” Unlike the alchemy of Newton’s time, Walter’s works.
Here is alchemy: Walter borrowed a computer language known as “lisp.” Lisp expressions can operate on one another. So expression 1 encounters expression 2. At random, it is decided if 1 will operate on 2 or 2 will operate on 1. Whichever way, after the operation, the lisp expression that was operated on typically is transformed into a new lisp expression.
You see the analogy to chemistry. The transformation of the lisp expression to a new lisp expression is rather like a chemical reaction. The operating lisp expression that does the transformation is rather like an enzyme catalyzing a reaction.
So Walter let loose a pot full of 10,000 lisp expressions in a computer. These merrily bumped into one another creating new lisp expressions. Walter, as a good theoretical chemist from the Eigen-Schuster tradition, imagined his algorithmic chemistry in a “chemostat” that would hold the total number of lisp expressions at a constant 10,000. So if extra lisp expressions drove the total above 10,000, Walter randomly chose enough lisp expressions to eliminate from the pot to keep the total at 10,000. This pruning back to a total of 10,000 provides a selection pressure for lisp expressions that are formed more often than average.
Walter let loose the floodgates of his alchemical world. A torrent of ever new lisp expressions, then, stunningly, a few, then more often, one sees an enlarging population of a subset of already-seen lisp expressions.
What had Walter found? The first thing he found were “copiers,” that is, lisp expressions that could copy any lisp expression, including themselves. Once such replicators emerged, they took over Walter’s steaming pot of lisp expressions. Indeed, such a lisp expression is rather like Jack Szostak’s hoped-for RNA polymerase, able to copy any RNA sequence, including itself. Walter called such copiers “type-1” organizations.
Could other self-reproducing organizations emerge? Walter “cheated” and simply disallowed copier replicators to occur. Bereft of copiers, Walter’s soup ripped forward again. Again novel lisp expressions came forth in profusion. Again, after a while, a recurrent set of lisp expressions emerged.
What had Walter found? He found collectively autocatalytic sets of lisp expressions, essentially identical to my collectively autocatalytic sets of polymers. Walter called these “type-2” organizations. In each such collectively autocatalytic lisp set, each expression is formed by the action of some lisp expression on some lisp expression in the set. The set as a whole is collectively reproducing.
But could one find a hierarchy beyond type-2 organizations? Further research has gotten as far as a kind of type-3 organization, which consists of two or more type-2 organizations that jointly coexist and create a kind of mutual glue of lisp expressions. The glue would not be formed by either type-2 organization alone but is the conjoint construction of the plurality of type-2 organizations.
So a modest hierarchy of algorithmic chemical systems has been found. The type-3 organizations seem analogical to eukaryotic cells that harbor diVerent replicators, mitochondria, plasmids, nuclei, in a common mutual glue of cytoplasm and shared processes.
Curiously, no higher-order organization has yet been seen. It is deeply interesting to me that no one knows why. What is limiting the persistent emergence of novel reproducing algorithmic systems?
Indeed, there are now a modest diversity of algorithmic models, such as Tom Ray’s “Tierra.” In Tierra, computer strings live in the memory core, reproduce, and fight one another for space in the core. A “reaper” kills random critters. Evolution to form a variety of parasites and hyperparasites occurs, including some slightly hierarchical agents. Interestingly, again the total diversity of types of critters is limited.
As John McCaskill, another theoretical physicist-chemist in the Eigen-Schuster group, points out, no one has succeeded so far in creating an algorithmic system of reproducing entities that generates impressive hierarchical agents or persistent, increasingly complex organization. Again, no one knows why.
It is possible that the constraint to algorithmic critters may be the problem. Indeed, I will suggest that the biosphere is richer than that which can, in the normal senses I know, be called algorithmic. That which is algorithmic is eVectively constructable by a formal procedure that begins with definable input “data” and is operated upon by a “program” in the Turing or von Neumann sense. But I will argue that we cannot prestate some biological analogue of the input data, nor is there some biological analogue of the program governing the unfolding of a biosphere. I will argue that the configuration space of a biosphere cannot be finitely prestated, that persistent novelty occurs in the biosphere and universe as a whole. And I will opine that if we cannot finitely prestate the configuration space of a biosphere, then something is odd with how we have been taught to do our science, for in Newtonian physics, Einstein’s physics, and Bohr’s physics, one can finitely prestate the configuration space in question. In chapter 10, borrowing on joint work with quantum gravity scholar and friend, Lee Smolin, I will suggest that if we cannot prestate the configuration space of a universe then “time” is real and necessary, and that the way a universe constructs itself may have analogies to the way a biosphere constructs itself.
Remember, a propagating organization that builds itself and persistently ramifies in a nonequilibrium setting is not yet a concept that we understand. We have matter, energy, and entropy, but no clear notion of propagating organization in the sense we here struggle to articulate. And because the way a biosphere gets on with constructing itself may not be algorithmic, it may be that story is part of how we must, in fact, make sense of the persistent emergence of novelty in the biosphere.
Well, that’s a mouthful. We’ll have to struggle below to see if it makes sense and might be correct.
I want to return to Walter Fontana’s algorithmic chemistry to note an interesting feature. Let’s define higher-order machines in Walter’s chemistry. We might think of “bundles” of lisp expressions, where an “input bundle” of lisp expressions is fed into an “assembly-line bundle” of lisp expressions to yield an “output bundle.” Nothing prevents our consideration of such bundles. Given a set of possible initial lisp expressions, say, N diVerent expressions, the diVerent subsets, or bundles, that are possible are just two raised to the Nth power. This 2N set is called the “power set” of the N symbol strings. A bundle acting on a bundle may produce a bundle. In general, this is just a mapping on the power set in which “machine bundles” act on input bundles to yield output bundles; that is, the set of possible input bundles, machines, and output bundles is the set of possible mappings of the power set into itself.
Well, obviously one could get bundles of lisp expressions = complex assembly lines of lisp expressions acting as machines on complex ordered sets of bundled input lisp expressions to yield ordered sets of bundled output lisp expressions. Here the “ordering” of the lisp expressions would define the assembly-line sequence of operations of the machine lisp bundle, and the ordering of lisp expressions in the input bundle would define the order in which the machine acted on the set of lisp expressions in the input bundle. And just as obviously, if Walter got type-1 and type-2 autocatalytic sets of simple lisp expressions, one could get type-1 and type 2-autocatalytic sets of machine lisp bundles operating on one another. And if sets of machines could be ordered into “units” to act on sets of input bundles to yield sets of output bundles, still higher-order autocatalytic sets of type-1 and type-2 should emerge.
Why didn’t Walter find these higher-order entities? I suspect part of the answer is because nothing in his algorithmic chemistry abets the ordering of lisp expressions into ordered sets treated as units and machines by one another. The collective properties of ordered sets of lisp expressions are not recognized and acted upon as collective objects by Walter’s soup of lisp expressions.
But such limitations seem not to hinder the biosphere. We do witness the emergence of molecular assembly lines and molecular assemblages whose collective properties are recognized and acted upon by natural selection. The transcription and translation of the DNA code to messenger RNA and protein is one example. But there are others. Many enzymes form ordered arrays of multimolecular complexes in which a substrate is progressively passed from one to another active site along an analogy to an assembly line. These higher-order complexes of molecular devices arise because natural selection is able to act upon the collective properties of such molecular aggregates when those collective properties augment adaptive fitness. In eVect, natural selection recognizes the life context in which the collective behaviors of these higher-order molecular structures are advantageous.
It is important to stress an obvious feature of the biosphere, in contrast to the algorithmic computational systems of Fontana, Ray, and others. The algorithmic systems manipulate symbols according to discrete, well-defined transformation rules, a kind of algebra-mapping symbols or symbol strings into symbol strings.
In contrast, the biosphere is built up of the doings, the embodied know-how, carryings on of autonomous agents = real physical molecular systems grafting a flow of matter and energy, constraint construction, and organization into their persistent coevolution. As we will see below = where I give grounds to think that we cannot prestate the configuration space of a biosphere, hence cannot prestate the adaptations that may come to exist in an evolving biosphere = real macroscopic physical systems that are autonomous agents may not be constrained in what they can produce, as is a formal mathematical algebraic symbol system. If so, then the “algorithmic freedom” of a biosphere is deeply important, for the science of Newton, Einstein, and Bohr all suppose prediction by algorithmic calculation.
Indeed, I suspect that the persistent innovations in a biosphere stem in no small measure from the fact that while we cannot prestate the configuration space of a biosphere, the categories relevant to its unfolding novel functionalities, the biosphere is not hampered by our failure at categorization. Unlike the well-defined and formal transformation rules of an algebra or a calculational process such as lisp, the transformation rules of the biosphere enlarge and change in ways that cannot be prespecified. As concrete examples, consider the evolution of the genetic code and consider the structure of eukaryotic chromosomes, whose complex coordinated behaviors underlie both normal mitotic cell division and the astonishing sequence of meiotic reduction cell divisions in which maternal and paternal homologue chromosomes synapse, undergo recombination, and separate such that the final sperm or egg cell receives, at random, only one homologue of each parental chromosome. The emergence of these complex macromolecular systems has altered the way evolution itself unfolds.
Richard Palmer, a physicist at Duke University and the Santa Fe Institute, has commented to me that physics is used to distinguishing the initial and boundary conditions from the “laws.” But in the evolution of a biosphere, the emergence of systems such as the genetic code and meiosis seems rather like the emergence of new laws. This has led Palmer to wonder whether the distinction between initial and boundary conditions and laws is really as clean as it appears in, say, Newtonian physics.
The Furniture of the Universe
All of this has, somehow, to do with the question of “the furniture of the universe” and with the troublesome questions of “emergence” and “reductionism.” These are contentious issues. Philosophers and others have struggled with these issues for years. I state merely some of their outlines.
There is a strong form of reductionism, the “x is ‘nothing but’ y” version. We met an example of this form of reductionism earlier in the eVorts to make good on sense data and logical atomism, where the hope was to build up an epistemology based on the least questionable propositions, namely reports of sense data, “I seem to hear a middle C note now,” “This seems to feel like a hard, flat surface.” Then the statement, “A Windsor rocker is in the living room,” is nothing but a finitely prespecified list of statements about sense data.
On this definition of reductionism, a higher-level concept is reduced to a lower-level language if the truth of a defined set of statements in the lower language is both necessary and suYcient for the truth of a statement in the higher language. If this could be done, then the higher-level statement is nothing but a shorthand for the list of necessary and suYcient statements in the lower, reducing, language. Thus, the truth of the statement, “There is a Windsor chair in my oYce,” would be reduced to the truth of some specifiable set of statements about sense data. As we saw, this eVort failed in the case of statements about physical objects and sense data. While it is relatively easy to find suYcient sense data statements, it appears to be impossible to finitely specify a set of necessary and suYcient sense data statements whose truth would be interchangeable with true statements about the Windsor chair in my oYce.
Wittgenstein wrote persuasively that the same systematic diYculty was lodged in attempts to reduce one language game to another, for example, from a description of a legal event to a description in terms of mere human actions to a description in terms of physical events. As we noted earlier, legal descriptions involve a web of concepts concerning guilt, innocence, responsibility, evidence, admissible procedure that are absent from a description of human actions outside of the legal framework. And descriptions of human actions = and, a fortiori, descriptions of the doings of autonomous agents, even bacteria acting on their own behalf to get dinner = seem to involve a diVerent language game than mere descriptions in terms of physical events.
Among other critical features of the action-and-doing language game is that, compared to a hypothetical “complete” physical description, the action-and-doing description picks out the relevant features with respect to the goals of the autonomous agent. Interestingly, once we are at Dennett’s level of Popperian creatures, which can have internal models of, and plans for, the future and can have their models die in their stead, we seem to have arrived at a level of organization in which action-and-goal talk becomes essential. Is there a finitely prestatable set of statements about physical events that is jointly necessary and suYcient for the truth of the statement, “The cheetah is hunting the gazelle”? Like other eVorts, we will find suYcient conditions but be hard pressed to find jointly necessary and suYcient conditions.
The dictionary hints at where our reductionism ideas may go wrong: Every word in the dictionary is defined in terms of other words. How could it be otherwise? Concepts are defined in webs, somehow tacked onto the real world by ostensive definitions = definitions given by pointing to examples. We carve up the world in a variety of ways, Wittgenstein’s language games, that appear not to be reducible to one another in the strict sense of necessary and suYcient conditions. And this, in turn, underlies the question whether legal systems and human actions are parts of the furniture of the universe, somehow above or in addition to the locations and motions of atoms and fields.
Even at the level of basic physical theory, the same issues arise. For example, classical thermodynamics is a well-defined science in its own right. Ludwig Boltzmann, Willard Gibbs, and others struggled to invent statistical mechanics, based on Newtonian laws operating on a set of idealized particles in the 6N-dimensional phase space we have discussed. It is generally seen as a triumph that the classical thermodynamic concepts of temperature, pressure, and entropy were reduced to statistical features of idealized sets of gas particles: temperature becoming the average kinetic energy of the particles, pressure the momentum transferred to the walls of the vessel, and entropy a measure of the number of microstates per macrostate.
But before complete triumph is declared, we should ask whether statistical mechanics constitutes a set of necessary and suYcient statements with respect to classical thermodynamics. The answer appears to be no. While statistical mechanics based on Newtonian forces yields a set of suYcient conditions, that statistical mechanics is not jointly necessary and suYcient. David Gross and other physicist colleagues have confirmed to me that one could construct diVerent, consistent statistical mechanics based on particles following non-Newtonian laws, all of which would be interpretable as reductions of classical thermodynamics. So, even at the heart, where reduction is supposed to have taken place, there seems to be no finitely prestateable set of necessary and suYcient conditions on a lower level over a set of possible statistical mechanics that would jointly suYce for a reduction of classical thermodynamics.
The same problem arises with Darwinian theory. Darwin tells us that evolution occurs by reproduction with heritable variation and natural selection. Our biology, based on DNA and RNA and proteins, is an instantiation, a suYcient condition for Darwinian evolution. Could we now state all possible physical systems that might be capable of replication, heritable variation, and natural selection? I think not.
There is a weaker sense of reductionism, namely the casting of an account of a higher-level object, concept, or phenomenon in terms of a suYcient, but not necessary and suYcient, set of conditions at a lower level. In this sense, statistical mechanics surely does “account for” classical mechanics. Many argue that this weaker sense of reductionism suYces. Well, suYces for what? That is a bit harder to be clear about. Roughly, the temptation is to say, “Temperature is nothing but the average kinetic energy of the atoms in the system”; that is, we appear to reduce the ontological furniture of the universe.
I suspect that this familiar ontological move is not always warranted. Let’s take some cases that Phil Anderson uses to exemplify “emergence.” Gold is a yellow, malleable metal familiar to all of us. Nowhere in the quantum mechanical description of atomic gold are these macroscopic properties to be found. Moreover, there is no deductive way to arrive at these macroscopic collective properties from the underlying quantum mechanics of atoms of gold. Rather, we observe the macroscopic properties, find lawful features of those properties, then attempt to link them to suYcient conditions in our quantum mechanical description of matter.
Another class of cases Anderson refers to is broken symmetries. A familiar example would be a pole standing vertically on an horizontal slab on the earth’s surface. The vertical pole is unstable in the face of gravity and will soon fall. It might fall and point in any direction. Hence, the system has the full symmetry of the plane prior to the falling of the pole. In due course, the pole does fall over and points in some specific direction. Thereby, the symmetry of the system prior to falling has been broken. We cannot deduce from the symmetry of the initial state how that symmetry will be broken.
Phil entitled his article relevant to this issue of emergence “More Is DiVerent.”
Let’s try it with my definition of autonomous agents. As I have already hinted, systems capable of self-reproduction and thermodynamic work cycles are presumably not limited to our current DNA, RNA, protein-based cells. Almost certainly, pure protein and small molecule systems can be autonomous agents. Almost certainly, pure RNA and small molecule systems can be autonomous agents. But perhaps self-gravitating systems, lasing systems, and a variety of other physical systems can be autonomous agents.
Again, we can give several suYcient conditions, but apparently we cannot finitely prespecify a set of necessary and suYcient conditions that would allow us to prespecify all the possible patterns of construction, constraint, and organization of physical processes and matter flows that would constitute an autonomous agent.
On the other hand, my definition does seem to aVord a “postconstruction” test. Bring us a candidate autonomous agent, and we can ask of it: Do you reproduce yourself and carry out at least one thermodynamic work cycle? The answer is either yes or no and is an objective fact about the entity in question. So one begins to see a pattern here. We may not be able to finitely prespecify all the possible systems that constitute an autonomous agent, but we can recognize one when we see it. We can give suYcient, but not necessary and suYcient conditions, for all physical realizations of an autonomous agent, and we can check any specific candidate case. Further, any specific candidate case either is, or is not, an autonomous agent. The statement, “The bacterium is an autonomous agent,” is either true or false.
Based on this, I want to say that autonomous agents are parts of the ontological furniture of the universe. I also want to say, with Phil Anderson, that emergence is real and utterly nonmysterious.
On this view of emergence, the autonomous agent is more than the sum of its parts, but not in the sense that the behavior of the autonomous agent is not explicable as the total organization of the parts organized into the whole agent in its environment. Rather, an autonomous agent is more than the sum of its parts in the sense that a wide variety = indeed, an indefinite variety = of physical systems could be autonomous agents in the same sense, self-reproducing systems carrying out at least one work cycle.
Now we can turn to causality. The “nothing but” version of reduction, “an autonomous agent is nothing but   .   .   .   ,” has tended historically to see causality as running only upward, from the behaviors of atoms to their causal consequences in the behavior of larger entities such as tigers.
But I find myself troubled by this view and will provide an example of why. Millions of years ago, the last female trilobite, Tomasina, was hurrying to find a good place to lay her eggs. Suddenly, Tomasina saw a hideous starfish, named Darthvader, dead ahead. “Left or right? What shall I do?” she wondered. Tomasina jumped left. Darthvader jumped right, caught Tomasina, killed her, and devoured her and her eggs.
There are no more trilobites. Moreover, when Tomasina died, she took with her the unique proteins and small molecules that were trilobite molecular species. These kinds of molecules are gone from the biosphere. So too are descendant mutant molecules that might have arisen from further speciation from Tomasina’s tribe. Furthermore, other chemical reactions, which might have been catalyzed transforming some molecular species to others that Tomasina’s molecules and those of her descendants might have catalyzed, have perhaps never come to be in the biosphere that has evolved over the succeeding eons.
Now, Tomasina is lost as an entire organism acting in an environment. Yet the causal consequences of her wrong guess of direction to jump have propagated downward to lower levels of organization, namely the molecular species of which the biosphere is composed.
Downward causation is real and nonmystical. There are now more old tires along roadsides than wagon wheels. The car has replaced the Conestoga.
I distrust a reductionism that sees causality as bottom up. In what sense is Tomasina nothing but the atoms and their locations and motions in three-dimensional space of which she was comprised? The concepts of atoms in motion in three-dimensional space do not appear to entail the concepts of an autonomous agent, self-consistent constraint construction, release of energy, propagating work tasks, and the closure of catalysis, tasks, and other features that constitutes the propagating organization that is an autonomous agent or a coevolving ecology of autonomous agents. In one sense, of course, there is nothing but the atoms in motion in three-dimensional-space in Tomasina. But the historical coming into existence of life in the universe, of autonomous agents, and of the propagating organization that is Tomasina and her bioworld is nowhere accounted for by Newton’s laws. What, after all, do Newton’s laws of motion have to do with a suYcient account of Tomasina’s jump to the left rather than the right? Is Tomasina as a whole organism part of the furniture of the universe? Yes.
Adaptations, Exaptations, and the Impossibility to Finitely Prestate the Configuration Space of a Biosphere
One contentious issue leads us to another. And now I hope to trouble you deeply.
Tomasina was but one of many lineages of creatures evolving much as Darwin taught us, by heritable variation and natural selection. Let’s turn to a Darwinian account of the function of the heart. Roughly, Darwin would say, the function of the heart is to pump blood. Namely, Darwin would say, this causal consequence of the heart is the virtue for which it was, and persistently is, selected by natural selection. I tend to think Darwin’s account of the heart is correct. Notice that the form of the account is ontological. Hearts came into existence, somehow, and are sustained because it is advantageous to organisms to have a means to pump blood.
But the heart has other causal consequences. For example, the heart makes heart sounds as its valves open and close. Presumably, heart sounds are not the causal consequences of the heart upon which natural selection has acted. Heart sounds are not the function of the heart.
It is precisely this point, that the function of a part of an organism is a subset of its causal consequences, to which I appealed earlier in stating that in an autonomous agent discerning the work task done by the constrained release of energy required finding the subset of causal consequences of that work task that were functionally important to the life cycle of the autonomous agent in its environment and, therefore, were presumably selected and sustained by natural selection. My point was that we cannot know the functions of parts except in the context of the whole autonomous agent in its environment.
But now we come to a more radical issue, Darwinian preadaptations, or in Stephen J. Gould’s term, “exaptations.” Darwin noted that in an appropriate environment a causal consequence of a part of an organism that had not been of selective significance might come to be of selective significance and hence be selected. Thereupon, that newly important causal consequence would be a new function available to the organism.
Take a fanciful case in point. The human heart not only makes heart sounds, but it also is a set of resonant chambers. Suppose you were in Los Angeles, felt something odd in your chest, and thought, “My God! An earthquake!” You did whatever the right thing was and survived, alone among millions. Your heart happened to be preadapted to pick up earthquake pretremors. Now suppose you marry and have children who inherit your fatefully preadapted heart, and suppose earthquakes arose often enough for this new capacity to oVer survival advantage to you and your oVspring. Soon a subspecies of Homo sapiens would arise with earthquake detectors in their chest. Not bad.
Now, evolution by such preadaptations, or exaptations, are not rare; they are the grist of adaptive evolution. Thus arose the lung, the ear, flight, presumably most major adaptations and presumably many or even all minor ones as well. It suYces for my purposes that many adaptations arise as Darwin’s preadaptations, or Gould’s exaptations.
Here now is my troublesome question. Do you think that you could state, ahead of time, all the possible causal consequences of bits and pieces of organisms that might in some odd circumstances or another turn out to be preadaptations and hence be selected and come to exist in the biosphere? Stated more starkly, do you think that you can finitely prestate all the context-dependent causal consequences of parts of all possible organisms that might be preadaptations, hence be selected and come to exist in the biosphere?
I believe, and it is a matter of central importance if I am correct, that the answer is no. I do not think it is possible to finitely prestate all the context-dependent causal consequences of parts of creatures that might turn out to be useful in some weird environment and hence be selected. I’m not yet certain how to prove that this is not possible, although I will have a try at it below.
Another way of stating what I am driving at is this: Is there a finitely prestatable set of all the possible potential biological functions? Again, I think the answer is no. Yet another way of stating this is to say that there is no finite prestatement of the configuration space of a biosphere. We cannot say ahead of time all the possible constellations of matter, energy, process, and organization that is a kind of “basis set” for a biosphere in the sense that the atomic chart of the elements is a finite basis set for all of chemistry.
It is time for a story. A particularly ugly squirrel named Gertrude was atop a tree 65,433,872 years ago. Gertrude was ugly because she had folds of skin from her forearms stretching to her hind limbs. So ugly was Gertrude that she was shunned by the other squirrels and was sadly alone atop a magnolia tree eating lunch. But just yards away, high in a pine, was Bertha, an owl. Bertha spotted Gertrude and thought, “Lunch!” Bertha flashed downward through shafts of light toward Gertrude. Gertrude looked suddenly up and was terrified. “GAAAAAAH,” she cried and jumped in desperation from the top of the magnolia tree, flinging her arms and legs wide in terror.
And Gertrude flew! Yes, she flew away from the magnolia tree, eluding the bewildered Bertha. Later that month, Gertrude was married in a civil ceremony to a handsome squirrel, as she had become a heroine, was no longer shunned, and was considered a prize mate. Her odd flaps turned out to be a consequence of a simple Mendelian dominant gene, hence her kids had the same wondrous capacity to fly.
And that is how flying squirrels got their wings, more or less.
Now, after the fact, after Gertrude jumped in terror from the magnolia tree, we would all say in wonder, “Did you see what Gertrude just did?!” And we would tell the story of Gertrude. But could we have said beforehand that Gertrude’s ugly skin flaps would happen to be of use that day? Perhaps, perhaps not. Could we have said it four billion years ago? Or said it today about all possible future exaptations? No. Was some known law of physics violated by Gertrude? No.
Now a story about tractors: It is said, and I choose to believe it true, that some engineers were hard at it trying to invent the tractor. “Good idea, a tractor,” was the collective wisdom. Needing lots of power, the engineers began with a huge engine block and sought to mount the block on a chassis. But the engine block was so massive that it crushed chassis after chassis. The engineers were stumped. Then one day, one of the engineers said, “You know, the engine block is so rigid, we could use the engine block itself as the chassis and hang everything else oV the engine block. And so that’s how the tractor got its chassis. And the chassis is just another Darwinian preadaptation, or Gouldian exaptation.
A brief history of the origin of writing: In the early Near East, loans of sheep and goats were common. The borrower would give the lender a small, closed vessel of baked clay, containing a number of stones equal to the number of borrowed sheep. Upon return of the sheep, the vessel would be broken open and the stones counted to make sure as many sheep were returned as had been borrowed.
But sometimes the clay vessels were broken accidentally by the lender before the time of return of the sheep. When the vessel was broken, sometimes the stones would fall out and become lost. The lender could not be sure he had recovered all his sheep. So people started making scratch marks near the top of the vessel before they baked the clay, to denote the number of stones placed inside the closed vessel. One day it dawned on someone that with the scratch marks on the surface of the clay vessel the stones inside were not needed. They smoothed the clay and began keeping notes of loaned sheep by marks baked into the clay. Cuneiform writing began.
Do you think you could finitely prestate all the context-dependent causal consequences of human artifacts that might turn out to be useful in some odd environment or for some odd purpose? I don’t think so. It is not that we cannot finitely prestate some infinite things. For example, Fourier had a wonderful idea. “Sine and cosines, you know,” he muttered to himself in French. “All possible wavelengths, out to infinity, down to infinitesimal, all possible phase oVsets.   .   .   . Haha!” And Fourier proved his theorem that any wiggly line on a plane surface could be approximated to arbitrary accuracy with a weighted set of phase-oVset sines and cosines drawn from the infinite basis set of all sine and cosine functions. Fourier finitely prestated an infinite basis set for all continuous diVerentiable wiggly lines on long blackboards.
But can we finitely prestate all possible exaptations for all possible organisms, or even the current organisms, in our biosphere? Again, while I’m still not certain how to prove my claim, I claim the answer is no. We cannot prestate the configuration space of the biosphere. But notice our failure is not hindering the biosphere from exapting all the time. Gertrude did it. And every bacterium whose molecules wiggle in a useful way that turn out to detect a source of energy or danger or opportunity in some novel fashion tends to be selected for that novel functionality. Look at the rate of emergence of bacteria resistant to our antibiotics and the myriad unexpected ways such resistance arises at the molecular level. Who could have foretold the ways?
The example of the common emergence of Darwinian preadaptations in the biosphere may point to an interesting connection with the diYculty Fontana and others have had achieving the persistent emergence of more complexity in algorithmic models such as alchemy and Tierra. Gertrude did fly, and thereby the capacity of her folds of skin to function as wings were selected. Flying squirrels came to exist in the universe. Restated, a property of Gertrude = indeed, here a collective property of her atomic constituents = made itself manifest in the real physical world in a context that lent survival advantage to Gertrude. Were we to have a formal algorithmic description of a formal simulated algorithmic Gertrude that did not have as an algorithmic consequence that her skin flaps might function as wings, then the emergence of the higher-order category of “winged squirrel” could not be derived algorithmically. Similarly, were we to have a formal description of an engine block that did not include its rigidity, we could not algorithmically derive that the engine block could be used as a chassis.
But, we might ask, could we not have a complete physical description of Gertrude or the engine block such that all possible properties might be derived from that complete physical description? The answer is almost certainly no. It is an old philosophic realization that there is no finite description of a simple physical object in its context. For example, the coVee table in my living room is made of three wooden planks, four short squat legs, runners between all pairs of legs. The middle board has a crack in it some eight inches long, a quarter of an inch wide at the end of the board, narrowing to nothing along a particular curved arc. A second crack, smaller, is six inches from the first crack. A cracker is on the table. A personal computer is on the table. The first crack is seven feet from the door. The second crack is seven feet six inches from the door. Both cracks are 256,000 miles from the moon and 4.3 light years from the nearest star. A dead grasshopper is on the table to the left of the end of the first crack and about 4.3 light years from the nearest star. A mote of dust hovers an inch above the table, two inches from a leaf that drifts down from a ficus in the living room.
You get the sense that there is no complete description of the table. Why does it matter? Because I myself made an exaptation of which I am deeply proud. You see, I was worried one day that my wife or adult son might knock my PC oV the table, so I wedged the power cord into the first crack and plugged the cord into a floor socket. Thereby, my PC worked on the table, and couldn’t be knocked oV easily. You can understand my pride here, as with my Rube Goldberg device to water my bean field.
But even this tiny invention, this tiny exaptation, could not readily have been finitely prestated. How would one, in describing all the context-dependent features of the table, happen to list the crack and its distance to the floor socket that happen to turn out to be relevant for my brilliant solution of a sudden problem? In short, there seems to be no finitely prestatable eVective procedure to list all the context-dependent features of objects and organs that might prove useful for some oddball purpose by some organism. My invention, the tractor invention, the cuneiform invention, and Gertrude’s invention were all genuine novelties in the universe.
This brings us to a wondrous set of issues. You see, we have indeed been taught by our physicist friends to do science by prestating the configuration space in question. Consider our now rather tired example of statistical mechanics with Avogadro’s number of gas particles in a liter container. First, note that we can finitely specify ahead of time the 6N-dimensional configuration space of the gas, that is, all the positions and momenta of the N gas particles in three-dimensional-space inside the liter box. Then Boltzmann assumed the ergodic hypothesis about wandering all over the configuration space, did the calculations, and, lo, statistical mechanics is upon us.
Now Newtonian mechanics: Prestate the initial and boundary conditions, the particles and force laws, and with them the possible configuration space and calculate away. So too in general relativity: Given Einstein’s equations, prestate the initial and boundary conditions and seek solutions. Solutions are possible universes. The set of possible solutions is the configuration space allowed by general relativity. And in quantum mechanics, one talks of specifying the classical conditions of the experiment, and thereby the configuration space of the quantum system, preparing an initial state, and using Schrödinger’s equation to propagate amplitudes for the entire future evolution in the configuration space for all conceivable observables. Again in quantum mechanics, in any specific context the configuration space is to be finitely prestatable, then we follow the deterministic time evolution of the Schrödinger equation in configuration space, square the resulting amplitudes to predict the probabilities of measurements, and then carry out macroscopic measurements. We know the configuration space ahead of time.
But what if we cannot prestate the configuration space of a biosphere? In that case, the way Newton taught us to do science is not the whole story. We cannot calculate as he did. And, in fact, biologists do not often do science as Newton taught. We carry on an odd mixture of historical analysis of the actual branching pathways of evolution; a dollop of theory about evolutionary landscapes, molecular evolution and coevolution, and ecosystems; and a lot of detailed experimental work to understand how actual creatures develop, how their life cycles unfold, how they assemble into ecosystems, and so forth.
And biologists tell stories. If I am right, if the biosphere is getting on with it, muddling along, exapting, creating, and destroying ways of making a living, then there is a central need to tell stories. If we cannot have all the categories that may be of relevance finitely prestated ahead of time, how else should we talk about the emergence in the biosphere or in our history = a piece of the biosphere = of new relevant categories, new functionalities, new ways of making a living? These are the doings of autonomous agents. Stories not only are relevant, they are how we tell ourselves what happened and its significance = its semantic import.
In short, we do not deduce our lives; we live them. Stories are our mode of making sense of the context-dependent actions of us as autonomous agents. And metaphor? If we cannot deduce it all, if the biosphere’s ramblings are richer than the algorithmic, then metaphor must be part of our cognitive capacity to guide action in the absence of deduction.
Indeed, in biology itself the “narrative stance” is gaining in popularity. “Did you see what Gertrude pulled oV? That’s how flying squirrels evolved! Dominant Mendelian gene, you see, easily selected once the right environmental conditions arose.” The propagating exapting biosphere is getting on with it, and it appears that we crucially need stories to do some of the telling of that getting on with it.
How odd. C. P. Snow wrote of the two cultures, science and the humanities, never to mix. Our inability to prestate the configuration space of a biosphere foretells a deepening of science, a search for story and historical contingency, yet a place for natural laws.
Forever Creative
In this chapter I have been trying to say, argue, articulate the possibility that a bio-sphere is profoundly generative = somehow fundamentally always creative. The cornerstone of this dawning near conviction lies in the belief I now hold with some confidence that we cannot finitely prestate the configuration space of a biosphere. New variables = the genetic code, recombination, Gertrude’s wings, writing, the tractor = persistently emerge. New language games and living games emerge. What is the status of my claim that we cannot finitely prestate the configuration space of a biosphere? I do think my claim is true. But why? I am not sure. It is wise to explore some possible reasons.
A first possibility is that the biosphere, like a complex algorithm, unfolds in ways that cannot be foretold. Recall that for many algorithms the behavior of the algorithm cannot be prestated in any form more compressed than simply watching the program unfold. The famous “halting problem” is the classic example. For many algorithms that are to compute an answer, then halt, we cannot say ahead of time whether the computer will halt in finite time.
I do not think the biosphere is akin to this diYculty with many algorithms. If we consider such algorithms, the building blocks of the algorithms = for example, the binary symbols 1 and 0; the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponentiation, and root taking; and control operations such as, “If such and such, then do so and so, otherwise do this,” and “Do loops” = are well-stated, crisp, mathematical primitives. Our uncertainty about the unfolding of an algorithm does not lie in uncertainty about the primitives, but about the consequences of the arrangements of these agreed upon primitives in a given computer code. For example, will the algorithm based on those primitives halt or not halt in finite time?
But among the exaptations in a biosphere are those that appear to alter the primitive objects and control operations. Thus, the evolution of chromosomes that replicate and partition to daughter cells, the evolution of the genetic code, and the evolution of controlled recombination all seem to be the evolution of the generative machinery of evolution itself. Insofar as this is true, our incapacity to prestate the configuration space of the biosphere is not a failure to prestate the consequences of the primitives, it appears to be a failure to prestate the primitives themselves.
Let’s consider the possibility that the incapacity to finitely prestate the configuration space of a biosphere is related to Godel’s theorem. Godel demonstrated that for axiomatic systems as rich or richer than arithmetic, given a set of axioms, there were always statements that were true but not formally derivable from the axioms. In addition, Godel showed that it was always possible to enrich the axiom set, and from that enriched axiom set, it would be possible to prove the formally true but unprovable statements in the formal system. On the other hand, he also showed that the new enriched axiom system would itself have still further formally true but unprovable statements.
I am not persuaded that the uncertainty about the configuration space of a biosphere is analogous to true but formally undecidable statements in a formal system. I base this upon an analogy between formal proof and causal consequences. The same parallel was pointed out by Robert Rosen in his book Life Itself. If we are to represent causal consequences by a formal system, then the concept of a proof derived by formal procedures from axioms = or more generally, the concept of a trajectory in a state space, where successive states along a trajectory are derived by a formal procedure such as integration of the diVerential equations representing the system = is the natural way to represent causal consequence. If this parallelism is taken seriously, then statements in a formal language that are true but unprovable in that formal language can have no causal pathway = that is, proof = from the axioms to the desired consequence. But this analogy seems to fail with respect to the evolution of the biosphere. There is a perfectly fine causal account of Gertrude and her maiden flight. We can reconstruct that account after the fact, even if we could not have predicted it. Thus, it does not seem that our diYculty in prestating all exaptations is the same as the mathematical fact of formally undecidable statements in an axiom system.
On the other hand, there may be a parallel between the exaptations of which we have spoken and Godel’s theorem and the augmentation of the axiom set such that formerly unprovable statements become provable. That is, the emergence of novel exaptations in evolution do seem rather like the emergence of novel primitive objects and primitive control operations = hence, novel axioms. In the examples above, the emergence of the genetic code and the emergence of chromosomes that duplicate and partition daughter chromosomes into two daughter cells, the evolution of controlled recombination, seem to become instantiated as “biological laws,” even though they are entirely historically contingent. Changing the biological laws in evolution seems rather like the generation of a novel axiom from which new consequences can be derived.
On this interpretation, my claim that we cannot finitely prestate the configuration space of a biosphere becomes the claim that the biosphere keeps generating new “causal axioms” from which it generates novel forms. Then just as we do not know where the new axioms of a formal system come from, save as the free invention of the logician involved, so it would seem that we cannot prestate the new generative exaptations that allow evolution to drive in new directions. I am not entirely persuaded by this analogy to finding ever new axioms in Godel’s theorem, but it does have some coherence.
Indeed, the failure to be able to prestate the configuration space of the biosphere may be yet deeper. I will take a stab at a proof. I begin by vitiating my assumption that one cannot prestate the configuration space of a biosphere, then try to show that the implications are that the number of potentially relevant properties is vastly hyperastronomical and that there is no way in the lifetime of the universe for any knower within the universe to enumerate, let alone work with, all the possible properties or categories and their causal consequences.
Let’s restrict attention to a model of a molecule, a square 10 x 10 array of magnetic dipoles, called spins, that can point only up or down. So our little system has 100 spins. Thus, I begin by vitiating my assertion and telling us what the configuration space is: it has something to do with the spin configurations. Well, how many diVerent spin configurations are there? Two raised to the 100th power. Now what might we want to call a “category” or a “property”? A sensible thought is that a category or class is some collection of the possible spin configurations, say, the configuration with all spins up plus all the configurations with no more than two spins down. How many such possible classes are there? The answer is the power set, 2 raised to the 2 raised to the 100.
This is a gargantuan number. It corresponds roughly to 10 raised to the 10 raised to the 29th. That is, the number of possible static categories of our tiny 100-spin system is about 10 raised to the power written with 1 with 29 zeros after it. By comparison, the estimated number of particles in the known universe is about 10 raised to the 80th power.
But we have so far considered only static categories = possible subsets of states of the 100-spin system. Suppose the spins can flip. Then the spin system can pass from one configuration to another. Suppose that the motions of the spin system are confined to closed cycles in the space of configurations, that is, simple orbits. Each of our 10 to the 10 to the 29 static categories is a set of one or more spin configurations. The number of possible orbits through that set is the factorial of the number of members of the set. The number of orbits among configurations that constitute the power set of classes of the 100 spins is vastly larger than the number of static categories.
On the other hand, arbitrary motion among spin states may be unreasonable. Instead, the flow among spin configurations may be constrained by the energy couplings among the spins. Physicists will properly talk of the “Hamiltonian function” that gives the energy of each spin configuration. Grant such a Hamiltonian, say a spin-glass Hamiltonian, where a spin glass is a disordered magnetic material. Then the system at finite temperature may wander through the square root of its 2⁄‚‚ states, hence about 10⁄ﬁ states in some complex patterns.
Now consider two such molecular systems, each merely 10 x 10 spins, each governed by a spin-glass Hamiltonian function, and let the two molecular systems interact in an aqueous medium. As the two touch one another and jiggle near one another, the coupled system performs some very complex dance of spin motions. In general, the equations describing that motion cannot be solved analytically but would have to be solved by numerical simulation. That is, there is no short description of the behavior of the system of equations, they must instead be solved by an algorithmic system that follows the trajectory in the state space of the system by tiny incremental steps. It becomes easy to conjure multimolecular systems, indeed autonomous agents are examples, in which even if the Hamiltonian for each single system and all the coupled systems were known, it would not be possible to compute the detailed dynamics of the coupled spin system in the lifetime of the universe.
But it is just such detailed wiggling by the coupled system that allows discovery of the preadaptation that a particular wiggling of one molecule senses a subset of states of another molecule and is useful for some survival purpose. The behaviors of the collective set of molecules among the coevolving autonomous agents stumble upon, then reinforce by heritable variation, the odd molecular motions that capture photons, that sense energy sources, that are the fine-grained molecular exaptations that are the daily stuV of evolution.
We cannot compute it. There is a sense in which the computations are transfinite = not infinite, but so vastly large that they cannot be carried out by any computational system in the universe. Indeed, one can consider the known radius of the universe at the Planck length and Planck timescale, and can imagine all the events that have happened within any causally connected light cone that might, therefore, carry out a computation. While vast, there are combinatorial problems that are still vaster. Presumably, no physical process in the unfolding universe could have foreknowledge of all features of such problems. Nor would there be an eVective procedure to prepare the cosmic computer in a proper initial state, read in the data, and read out its computation.
My best bet is that the incapacity to finitely prestate the configuration space of a biosphere is deeply related to the incapacity to enumerate and predict all the possible detailed dynamics of coupled molecular systems by any computational system in the universe. In turn, this incapacity is, I suspect, deeply related to the gargantuan nonergodicity of the historical universe that I discuss in the next chapter. And as we shall see in detail, the exaptations of Gertrude and others leaves macroscopic living footprints, propagating frozen accidents, on the history of the universe. The universe in its persistent becoming is richer than all our dreamings.




Chapter 7
The Nonergodic Universe:
The Possibility of New Laws
rom a biosphere and its mysteries, this investigation now steps gingerly toward the cosmos. Caveat lector: I am not a physicist.
Our now familiar liter of gas particles at room temperature comes to equilibrium rapidly, certainly on the order of hours or days. “Equilibrium” means, roughly, that the macroscopic properties of the system, such as temperature and pressure, have stopped changing, except for small “square root N” fluctuations away from equilibrium that soon dissipate back toward equilibrium. As we have noted, thanks to the ergodic hypothesis, the gas system ultimately visits each macrostate at a number of times proportional to the number of microstates in that macrostate. For equilibrium with respect to all macroscopic properties to have been attained, it is not necessary that all microstates have been sampled, of course, but that the statistical distribution of microstates approaches the equilibrium distribution.
Physicist Richard Feynman noted that equilibrium is when “all the fast things have happened, and the slow ones have not.” His dictum suggests, accurately, that the notion of equilibrium is not quite so self-evident.
The aim of the current chapter is to explore the profound failure, on the scale of a suciently large closed thermodynamic system and, a fortiori, the open system of the biosphere, to come close to equilibrium on vastly long time scales with respect to the lifetime of the universe. The main facts are known to physicists, of course. The universe is vastly nonergodic above modest levels of molecular complexity, let alone with respect to gross motions of parts of the universe with respect to one another.
Given that the universe is actually nonergodic, nonrepeating, and in macroscopically important ways, over a time scale vastly longer than the lifetime of the universe, we are entitled to broach the question of whether there might be general laws governing some or all aspects of this nonergodic behavior. No one knows, but I will raise a possibility that has a chance to be true for a biosphere. There is little harm in wondering if it might hint at a fourth law of thermodynamics for self-constructing systems such as biospheres.
The Actual and the Adjacent Possible
I now want to reintroduce a central concept of alarming simplicity. Consider all the kinds of organic molecules on, within, or in the vicinity of the Earth, say, out to twice the radius of the moon. Call that set of organic molecules the “actual.”
Now recall the concept of a reaction graph, a bipartite graph with nodes representing chemical species and lines called hyperedges leading from each set of substrates to a box and from the box to the product species of that particular reaction. Recall that we utilized arrows on the lines to distinguish substrates from products, but that the direction of flow of the reaction depended upon the displacement of the substrates and products of that reaction from the equilibrium concentrations for that reaction. That equilibrium ratio corresponds to the concentrations of substrates versus products, where the net rate of production of products from substrates equals the net rate of production of substrates from products.
The reaction graph is just the set of all the molecular species and all the hyperedges representing all the reactions among the species. Thus, consider the reaction graph among the molecular species in the actual, where at present presumably hundreds of trillions of molecular species exist.
Now consider the adjacent possible of the reaction graph of the actual. The adjacent possible consists of all those molecular species that are not members of the actual, but are one reaction step away from the actual. That is, the adjacent possible comprises just those molecular species that are not present in the vicinity of the Earth out to twice the radius to the moon, but can be synthesized from the actual molecular species in a single reaction step from substrates in the actual to products in the adjacent possible.
Note that the adjacent possible is indefinitely expandable. Once members have been realized in the current adjacent possible, a new adjacent possible, accessible from the enlarged actual that includes the novel molecules from the former adjacent possible, becomes available.
Note that the biosphere has been expanding, on average, into the adjacent possible for . billion years. Presumably, when life started there was a modest variety of a few tens to a few hundreds of organic molecular species  methane, hydrogen, cyanide, the familiar list. If there are now a standing diversity of million species and each had a hundred thousand genes and genes in each species were at least slightly dierent from genes in all other species, then, not counting molecular diversity within species, the number of genes is trillion. Given RNA, protein, polysaccharides, lipids, and other organic molecular species, the diversity is likely to be hundreds of trillions or more.
Something has obviously happened in the past . billion years. The biosphere has expanded, indeed, more or less persistently exploded, into the ever-expanding adjacent possible. The secular diversity of organic molecular species has increased, on average, over the past . billion years.
It is more than slightly interesting that this fact is clearly true, that it is rarely remarked upon, and that we have no particular theory for this expansion. Indeed, I note for future reference that the standing diversity of species in the biosphere has, on average, with noticeable crashes in large extinction events, increased over the past . billion years. And among us mere humans, the diversity of ways of making a living has increased dramatically over the past million years, the past hundred thousand years, and even over the past thousand years. If you wanted a rabbit for dinner thirty thousand years ago, you bloody well went out and caught a rabbit. Now most of us can go buy a rabbit dinner. Something again has happened. At the level of species and ways of making a living in the “econosphere,” the actual has expanded into a persistent adjacent possible.
We are all parts of the universe. So, in our little hunk of the universe, with the sun shining beatifically upon us, rather remarkable goings on have occurred. Indeed, the biosphere may be one of the most complex things in the universe.
Now a second simple point. The molecular species of the actual exist. Those in the adjacent possible do not exist  at least within the volume of the universe we are talking about, which we can expand in a moment to be the actual molecular diversity of the entire universe, not just our tiny patch of it.
The chemical potential of a single reaction with a single set of substrates and no products is perfectly definable, both the enthalpy and entropy. But we hardly need that sophistication. The substrates are present in the actual, and the products are not present in the actual, but only in the adjacent possible. It follows that every such reaction couple is displaced from its equilibrium in the direction of an excess of substrates compared to its products. This displacement constitutes a chemical potential driving the reaction toward equilibrium. The simple conclusion is that there is a real chemical potential from the actual to the adjacent possible. Other things being equal, the total system “wants” to flow into the adjacent possible.
If there are to trillion organic molecules in the biosphere and each pair of organic molecules can undergo at least one two substrate–two product reaction, then the diversity of reactions is the square of the diversity of molecular species, hence about x = . Some substantial fraction of these reactions flow from the actual to the adjacent possible. The total chemical potential from the actual into the adjacent possible is hard to estimate, but it is certainly not small.
The Nonergodicity of the Universe
A further point is of fundamental importance, in my view. The universe, at levels of complexity of complex organic molecules, is vastly nonergodic.
Consider the number of possible proteins of length . That is, we consider proteins made of the familiar kinds of standard encoded amino acids and, thus, linear chains of such amino acids. Since there are choices at each of positions, the number of possible proteins of length is raised to the th power, or approximately raised to the th power, .
Now let’s consider the estimated number of particles in the known universe, which is . Thus, the maximum number of pairwise collisions that could occur in any instant, ignoring distances between particles, is that number squared, or . A fast reaction occurs in a femtosecond, or one part in seconds. Then the number of pairwise collisions and reactions that can have occurred since the estimated time of the big bang fourteen billion years ago is times the number of femtoseconds since the big bang, which is about .
The total number of reactions on a femtosecond timescale cannot be larger than , a very very big number. But is infinitesimally small compared to the number of possible proteins of length , namely, . In short, the known universe has not had time since the big bang to create all possible proteins of length once. Indeed the time required to create all possible proteins at least once is at least the ratio of possible proteins to the maximum number of reactions that can have occurred in the lifetime of the universe, or times the lifetime of the universe.
Let that sink in. It would take at least to the th times the current lifetime of the universe for the universe to manage to make all possible proteins of length at least once. Obviously, with respect to proteins of length the universe is vastly nonergodic. It cannot have equilibrated over all these possible dierent molecules.
At a level of complexity above atomic nuclei, once into the realm of complex molecules, the universe will not, cannot, come to equilibrium, on vastly long timescales compared to its historical age. Indeed, the giant cold molecular clouds in galaxies, about degrees absolute in temperature, are highly complex mixtures of molecular species, many carbonaceous, as well as the birthplace of stars. We will return in a moment to wonder about whether a galaxy, considered as a closed thermodynamic system, reaches equilibrium chemically.
What about the arbitrary restriction to a femtosecond? The fastest known timescale is the Planck timescale, one in to the rd parts of a second, or seconds. At the Planck timescale, therefore, the universe can have created at most proteins of length compared to such proteins. It would take the known universe, chunking along on the Planck timescale, times its current lifetime to make all proteins of length .
Now many biological proteins are of length , or even amino acids. Hence the number of possible proteins of length does its now familiar hyperastronomical combinatorial explosion to or . The universe can have managed to make to the of these at the Planck timescale.
Forget it. The universe is vastly nonequilibrium, vastly nonergodic at the level of complex organic molecules. A fortiori, the universe is vastly nonergodic at the level of species, languages, legal systems, and Chevrolet trucks.
It follows that, even if we consider the universe as a whole, at the levels of molecular and organizational complexity of proteins and up, the universe is kinetically trapped. It has gotten where it has gotten from wherever it started, by whatever process of flow into a persistently expanding adjacent possible, but cannot have gotten everywhere. The ergodic hypothesis fails us here on any relevant timescale.
More, the biosphere, and the universe as a whole, may well be kinetically trapped into an evermore astonishingly small region of the entire space of the possible it might have reached. Stated otherwise, the set of actual small molecules and large molecules such as proteins that do exist now is presumably an increasingly tiny subvolume of the total set that might have arisen by now in the biosphere or the universe since the big bang.
This nonergodicity is puzzling. Just what, for example, does this mean with respect to the second law stating that thermodynamically isolated chemical systems approach equilibrium and their entropy increases to a maximum? In the familiar setting of a liter of gas at room temperature, equilibrium of macroscopic features is attained rapidly, and small macroscopic fluctuations such as deviation from chemical equilibrium among a fixed set of molecular species damp out fairly rapidly. By contrast, consider a giant cold molecular cloud in a spiral galaxy with about a hundred million solar masses; ignore gravitational eects and just consider the ongoing complex chemical reactions on the complex dust particles that exist in those clouds. The specific molecular configurations that arise almost certainly include molecular species that are ever unique in the history of the universe. If we may consider unique molecular species as macroscopic features of the cloud, then these fluctuations in macroscopic properties do not damp out; rather, they form the nexus for the generation of still new, unique molecular species. A specific cloud, like our biosphere, presumably becomes kinetically trapped into a very special set of complex molecular species that happen to have formed as the cloud evolves.
In short, since the relevant timescale for the ergodic hypothesis to hold is vastly longer than the actual present history of the universe, the macroscopic features of the universe with respect to the specific sets of complex molecules that exist on this planet  in giant cold molecular clouds, and so forth  are kinetically trapped into an infinitesimal subset of those molecular species that might have come into existence in an ensemble of dierent histories of the universe.
My quip above about the nonergodicity of the universe with respect to species, languages, legal systems, and Chevrolet trucks was not a jest. We noted in the previous chapter that autonomous agents can form hierarchies  hypercycles made of replicators linked in a cycle of mutual benefit are but the simplest case. The symbiotic construction of eukaryotic cells by merging of dierent bacterial forms to create mitochondria and chloroplasts and perhaps cell nuclei are another case. So too are multicelled organisms such as starfish and ourselves. These hierarchically complex autonomous agents have, do, and will invade an adjacent possible, definable at least at the chemical level, but also on morphological levels, behavioral levels, and beyond. At all levels, the biosphere has been invading a persistent adjacent possible for . billion years.
Which leads to an odd thought: The indefinite hierarchy upward in complexity is a “sink” where the burgeoning order of the universe constructed by such agents can be “dumped.” The biosphere has been doing this dumping for . billion years.
Now here are some further odd thoughts. There is an absolute zero temperature. You cannot get colder than absolute zero, where the only motions are quantum in nature. Because there is an absolute zero, and the extraction of work via the use of heat dierences, as in the Carnot cycle, requires dumping heat from a hotter to a colder reservoir, such “work cycles” require an ever colder sink and are bound to arrest at absolute zero. So, more or less, follows the dreaded “heat death” of the universe.
On the other hand, as we have just seen, the universe is vastly nonergodic at levels of complexity of complex organic molecules upward to autonomous agents coevolving with one another and beyond. There appears to be no upper bound on this complexity  there is no obvious upper bound that limits this sink, as absolute zero limits work cycles in heat engines. So it may begin to be worth raising the question whether the universe can expand into an adjacent possible for vastly longer periods than the current lifetime of the universe, becoming evermore kinetically trapped, thus evermore specific and more refinely dierentiated.
Formalizing the Adjacent Possible
It is helpful to attempt to formalize the concept of the adjacent possible. I will do so using classical physics and the now familiar concept of a N-dimensional phase space. Recall that our particles in the liter box had three positional variables and three momenta, or velocity variables, hence, six numbers per particle. For an N particle system, this is the familiar N-dimensional phase space.
Let’s just go ahead and define the classical N-dimensional phase space for a region of real space, including the sphere centered on the Earth out to twice the orbit of the moon and containing the positions and momenta of all particles from the Earth out to twice the orbit of the moon. Physicists always assure us that this makes sense. As usual, we can break this classical N-dimensional phase space into a very large number of tiny “cells,” each also N-dimensional. At any moment, the Earth-centered N system, call it the “Earth system,” is in one of these tiny cells, or microstates. Over time, the Earth system  or a larger one including the entire solar system or our galaxy or the local cluster of galaxies  flows from microstate to microstate. By our arguments above and ignoring gravity  a grave mistake in itself  clearly our Earth system has and will flow nonergodically in this phase space for vastly long time periods.
Now, the total adjacent possible to the current microstate of our Earth system is just the total number of microstates that are adjacent to our current microstate. And that number is very large indeed, for it is on the order of N. Say there are particles in the Earth system, a very crude guess, then the total number of adjacent possible microstates is about raised to the to the st power. In short, in principle the next state of our chunk of the universe is drawn from among raised to the to the st power neighboring microstates.
Now let’s define the real adjacent possible. Each point in our current microstate in its classical N-dimensional phase space lies on a specific trajectory that eventually either stays in the current microstate or leaves the current microstate to flow to one particular adjacent microstate. Consider all the points in the current microstate, and for each, draw a red arrow to the neighboring microstate into which that point flows. Then the real adjacent possible is the collection of all neighboring microstates reached by all the red arrows leaving our current microstate.
This is a perfectly fine definition in classical physics. The real adjacent possible from the current microstate might be a single adjacent microstate into which all arrows flow. That would mean that all the points in the current microstate lie on trajectories flowing to the same adjacent microstate.
Or the real adjacent possible might be the case that arrows flow from the current microstate to two adjacent microstates. That would mean that the points in the current microstate can be partitioned into two classes, perhaps lying in distinct regions of the current microstate. One class of points flows to one of the adjacent microstates; the other class flows along trajectories to the other adjacent microstate. But the implication of the existence of two classes of points in our microstate is that its symmetry is broken  the space is broken into two regions, each of which may be compact or be intermixed and intertwined volumes. One volume flows to one adjacent possible microstate; the other flows to the other adjacent microstate.
More generally, we can define the dimensionality of the real adjacent possible with respect to any microstate in the Earth system as the number of adjacent microstates into which flow occurs from somewhere within the current microstate. The dimensionality of the adjacent possible from a given microstate might be as low as or as large as the mathematical number of adjacent microstates, raised to the raised to the st power.
Clearly, the larger the dimension of the adjacent possible, the more symmetries have been broken within the current microstate, for it is broken into at least as many volumes internally as the dimensionality of the adjacent possible from that microstate. Of course, in the case of a classical deterministic N-dimensional phase space, the Earth system flows from its current microstate to only one of the real adjacent possible microstates.
It is interesting to remark that at some point if the dimensionality of the adjacent possible of a microstate of the Earth system increases enough, the volume within a microstate corresponding to flow to a specific adjacent possible microstate will become small enough that it must run up against Heisenberg’s “uncertainty principle.” Then at the quantum level the current microstate can have an amplitude to flow to many of the adjacent possible microstates. Which way the current microstate flows is then no longer deterministic, but a matter of throws of the quantum dice.
Historical Expansion into the Adjacent Possible and Hints of a Law
Let’s now ask whether we think that the dimensionality of the adjacent possible of the Earth’s biosphere has increased or decreased in the past . billion years. Consider as a start a liter of living bacteria and a liter of their dead, homogenized molecular components. In the living system, small fluctuations in chemical concentrations within cells are turning myriad genes on and o in the complex system of genetic regulatory networks known to exist in bacteria.
An example of a small section of the genetic network is the lactose operon in E. coli. The lactose operon contains three structural genes, that is, genes encoding proteins, and two nearby small sequences of DNA, called a “promoter” and an “operator.” The promoter and operator act to regulate the transcription of the structural genes into RNA. Normally, a repressor protein synthesized from a distant gene binds to the operator, blocking transcription of the structural genes from the promoter. In the presence of lactose, however, the lactose binds to the repressor protein and changes its configuration such that the repressor leaves the operator, freeing it. In that condition, other proteins bound at the promoter are able to transcribe the structural genes of the lactose operon. Included among these is the enzyme beta-galactosidase. Beta-galactosidase metabolizes lactose. Thus, the cell normally does not make the beta-galactosidase enzyme, yet in the presence of the metabolite for which that enzyme is required, the lactose operon works to turn on synthesis of the very enzyme that metabolizes lactose. But the fact that small changes in the internal lactose concentration within E. coli turn on synthesis of the lactose operon, including the beta-galactosidase that metabolizes lactose, is precisely the kind of “threshold event”  the operon switches on or does not switch on  that constitutes the breaking of symmetries in the current microstate of the liter of living bacteria. Mathematically, the thresholds become “separatrices” in the chemical state spaces of the bacteria, on one side of which the lactose operon turns on and on the other side of which it does not.
In fact, the lactose operon system is a bistable switch. Once the operon is switched on, one of the three structural proteins is a permease that enhances transport of lactose into the cell. Thus, once the operon is activated, it will remain active, even if the concentration of lactose outside the cell is lowered from an initial high level required to activate the operon to some intermediate concentration. At that intermediate external concentration, the cell can be stably in two states, lactose operon active or lactose operon inactive. Then small fluctuations of internal lactose concentration that cross the internal threshold separatrix concentration can cause the cell to jump from one to the other state of activity and remain in the other state for a relatively long time.
For the liter of living bacteria, the number of adjacent possible microstates is on the order of at least the number of dierent on-o combinations of activities of genes and metabolic products of which all the genetic regulatory networks of all the cells are capable. It seems obvious that the number of real adjacent possible microstates, hence the dimensionality of the adjacent possible from the current microstate of the liter of living bacteria, is very much larger than the dimensionality of the adjacent possible of the liter of dead and homogenized bacteria at the same temperature.
This simple observation suggests that in the past . billion years since life arose and autonomous agents began coconstructing a biosphere linking exergonic and endergonic reactions into a diversifying web of ways of making a living, as the molecular diversity, species diversity, and behavioral diversity has increased, the dimensionality of the adjacent possible of the biosphere as a whole, and most typical chunks of it, has increased dramatically.
With respect to my comment above about the broken symmetries eventually hitting the Heisenberg uncertainty limit on the volumes in each microstate, it is probably of more than passing interest that real living entities, cells, do straddle the classical and quantum boundary. One photon hitting a visual pigment molecule can beget a neural response. In short, real living systems straddle the quantum classical boundary. If there is a tendency of coevolving autonomous agents to increase the diversity of alternative events that can occur, then living entities must eventually hit the Heisenberg uncertainty limit and abide at least partially in the quantum realm.
Indeed, the hypothesis that living entities must eventually abut and even transgress the Heisenberg uncertainty limit and abide partially in the quantum realm leads to an intriguing hypothesis. In chapter we will consider “quantum decoherence.” This is a quite well-established phenomenon in which the quantum amplitudes propagating along dierent possible pathways between the same initial and final state can lose phase information. This loss of phase information then prevents the constructive and destructive interference that is the hallmark of quantum phenomena. The loss of the capacity for interference would mark the transition to classical behavior. Many physicists now think that such decoherence constitutes a modern interpretation of the famous “collapse of the wave function” during a measurement event, as posited by the Copenhagen school. The collapse of the wave function converts the propagating superposition of quantum possibilities into an actual, classical event.
The persistent intermingling of quantum and classical phenomena in a living cell might require quantum coherence, but that coherence is widely doubted at the normal temperatures of cells and organisms. On the other hand, persistent intermingling of quantum and classical phenomena might well occur and not require quantum coherence if the timescale of decoherence is close to or overlaps the timescales of cellular-molecular phenomena. Recent calculations suggest that the timescale of decoherence of a protein in water at room temperature might be on the order of seconds. Thus, it is interesting that proteins and other organic molecules have modes of motion on timescales over many orders of magnitude, spanning from tens of seconds down to second or less. Thus, the timescale of decoherence is almost the same as the rapid molecular motions in cells. It does not seem totally implausible that cells persistently abide in both the quantum and classical realms, in which the persistently propagating superposition of amplitudes for alternative molecular motions decohere on very rapid timescales and thereby help choose the now classical microstates of proteins and their motions as those proteins couple their coordinated dance with one another to carry out the alternative behaviors that guide a cell in its next set of actions, its adjacent possible. In short, cells may feel their way into the adjacent possible by quantum superpositions of many simultaneous quantum possibilities, which decohere to generate specific classical choices. Such a hypothesis should be testable.
More, at the high risk of saying something that might be related to the subject of consciousness, the persistent decoherence of persistently propagating superpositions of quantum possibility amplitudes such that the decoherent alternative becomes actualized as the now classical choice does have at least the feel of mind acting on matter. Perhaps cells “prehend” their adjacent possible quantum mechanically, decohere, and act classically. Perhaps there is an internal perspective from which cells know their world.
Having now defined the dimensionality of the adjacent possible and noted that the biosphere and universe as a whole is vastly nonergodic, hence, kinetically trapped in a small region of its total space of possibilities, it is fair to wonder whether general laws may govern this nonergodic flow. Given that the dimensionality of the adjacent possible of the biosphere has expanded in the past . billion years, I want to make the obvious conjecture at a law: Our biosphere and any biosphere expands the dimensionality of its adjacent possible, on average, as rapidly as it can.
I will return just below to think about bounds on this expansion. For, as we will see, it seems reasonable that if the expansion were too rapid, the system would destroy the propagating organization of autonomous agents whose coevolution and increasing diversity is what drives expansion into the adjacent possible and tends secularly to increase that dimensionality. Autonomous agents persistently stumble onto new ways of making a living with one another and exploit those new ways. The biosphere’s advance into the adjacent possible is just exaptation over and over again.
In fact, it seems reasonable to think of the “workspace” of the biosphere, that is, what can happen next, as its actual plus its real adjacent possible. It seems likely, and I do conjecture, that the biosphere is expanding its workspace, on average, as fast as it can do so without destroying itself in the process.
And brazen biologist that I am, I begin to wonder whether the universe as a whole in its nonergodic flow might be expanding the dimensionality of its total workspace including its adjacent possible as a secular trend. If so, then since the big bang, the universe persistently diversifies and becomes more complex in such a way that the diversity of dierent possible next events keeps increasing as rapidly, on average, as is possible. The greater the current diversity of matter, processes, and sources of energy, the more ways there are for these to couple to generate yet further novelty, further symmetry breakings. For this to be correct, time would have to have a directionality toward persistently broken symmetries. And an arrow of time would lie in this directionality. In chapter I return to these issues. There may be grounds to understand why the universe is so complex. In a generalization of our image of a self-constructing biosphere, the universe may construct itself to be as complex and diverse as possible.
If one could ever show such a law, a law in which the diversity and complexity of the universe naturally increases in some optimal manner, that would be impressive. Some fourth law of thermodynamics? An arrow of time? In short, one intriguing hypothesis about the arrow of time is that the nonergodic universe as a whole constructs itself persistently into an expanding adjacent possible, persistently expanding its workspace. This is in sharp contrast to the familiar idea that the persistent increase in entropy of the second law of thermodynamics is the cause of the arrow of time. But the second law only makes sense for systems and timescales for which the ergodic hypothesis holds. The ergodic hypothesis does not seem to hold for the present universe and its rough timescale, at levels of complexity of molecular species and above. Perhaps we are missing something big, right in front of us.
The nonergodicity of the universe as a whole and the biosphere in particular is interesting from another point of view. History enters when the space of the possible that might have been explored is larger, or vastly larger, than what has actually occurred. Precisely because the actual of the biosphere is so tiny compared to what might have occurred in the past . billion years and because autonomous agents can evolve by heritable variations that induce propagating frozen accidents in descendant lineages, the biosphere is profoundly contingent upon history.
Bounds on the Growth of the Biosphere’s Adjacent Possible
The first point to discuss about critical limits to the growth of the dimensionality of the adjacent possible is that major extinction events have occurred. Presumably the molecular diversity and certainly the species and behavioral diversity of the biosphere were devastated during such events. There are two schools of thoughts on these extinctions: the catastrophists and the endogenists. The catastrophists point to meteors, like the monster that hit o the coast of the Yucatan at the end of the dinosaur era, presumably, but not certainly, causing their extinction. The endogenists, including me, admit some big rocks plummeted but note the power law distribution in the size of extinction events, with many small ones and few large ones, and see in these signs self-organized criticality models, discussed in the next chapter, in which many small and few large extinction events arise from the endogenous coevolutionary behavior of ecosystems.
Particularly if we who favor endogenous dynamics are correct, I am precluded from arguing that biospheres endogenously always increase their adjacent possible. For I, among others, predict endogenous biosphere shenanigans among coevolving autonomous agents as the causes of small and giant extinction events. If there is any trend to increase the adjacent possible, it can only be a secular trend. More, any such expansion must ultimately be limited on Earth. One cannot have fewer than one member per species disporting themselves on, in, and around this globe. Each species member does occupy a hunk of three-dimensional space and the planet is only so big.
But I am more concerned with a probable endogenous self-regulation of any advance into the adjacent possible. If that advance into the adjacent possible were to take place too rapidly, it would tend to destroy the organismic propagating organization that is the expansion’s foundation and persistent wellspring.
Recall the concept of a supracritical chemical reaction system. Such systems persistently generate molecular novelty. As we saw in discussing the origin-of-life problem, at a critical diversity of molecular species and potential catalysts, a phase transition occurs in which the catalyzed reactions form a giant connected component. Molecular species flow from the founder set actual into a persistently expanding adjacent possible.
I am fond of telling the Noah’s Vessel experiment, hypothetical though it is. I ask, thereby, whether the biosphere is supracritical. Take two of every species, all hundred million of them, male and female, normalizing a bit for mass (so you have small bits of hippos and elephants per fly). Dump them all into a large blender and homogenize the hell out of them, breaking all tissue and cell boundaries, spilling out the stu of life into a common, homogenized liquor.
The small molecule diversity in the blender is presumably on the order of billions, the protein and polymer diversity is on the order of hundreds of trillions, thus . Assuming that any pair of molecular species can undergo at least one two substrate–two product reaction, the total number of reactions is, as noted above, the square of the molecular diversity, so is about . If the probability that any one protein species catalyzes any one reaction is, say, one in a trillion, or , then the expected number of catalyzed reactions is just the product of the number of reactions times the number of potential protein catalysts, divided by the probability that a given protein catalyzes a given reaction. This yields reactions times proteins divided by , which equals . In short, virtually all possible reactions will be catalyzed by something. Indeed, on average, each possible reaction will find dierent protein catalysts. A vast sustained explosion into the adjacent possible would occur. Ergo, the biosphere is supracritical. More precisely, the biosphere would be supracritical if all molecular species could be in eective contact with one another on short timescales. But all molecular species do not come in contact with one another willy-nilly, for molecular species are packaged into cells.
It is critical to note that individual cells are not supracritical. The crude argument says that a cell’s metabolism has about organic molecules. Consider squirting a novel molecule, Q, into a cell. Presumably Q can be one member of two substrates with each of these organic molecules. Thus, addition of Q to the cell aords about novel reactions. Let the protein diversity of the cell be bounded by the human number of genes at ,. Any such protein has evolved for some tasks, but may contain molecular nooks and crannies that can serve as novel catalytic sites. The expected number of novel catalyzed reactions due to the presence of Q is given by the product of the number of potential protein catalysts times the number of novel reactions made available by injection of Q into the cell, divided by the probability that any protein catalyzes any given reaction. The product of potential catalysts (the proteins) and the reactions is ,,, or . The best current guess at the probability that a randomly chosen protein catalyzes a randomly chosen reaction comes from the probability that a monoclonal antibody canalyzes a reaction and, as discussed above, is about one in a billion. If so, the expected number of the novel reactions that will be catalyzed when Q is squirted into a cell is ,, divided by ,,,, or.  Since . is less than , on average, no chains of novel reactions are catalyzed and cells are subcritical.
If the probability of catalysis is one only in a trillion (as used in the calculation to see if the biosphere as a whole is supracritical), rather than one in a billion, then cells are even more deeply subcritical. With catalysis only one in a trillion, the expected number of catalyzed reactions in a cell upon addition of Q is. 
So cells are subcritical. It is a very good thing indeed that cells are subcritical. If cells were supracritical, they would forever generate molecular diversity internal to themselves. Many of the novel molecular species would poison the cell. In short, cells must remain subcritical and cells in communities must remain subcritical, or else the rate of generation of molecular diversity would overwhelm the capacity of natural selection to winnow out the winners from the losers. Everything would die. All propagating organization in the biosphere would rip itself apart in a torrential, if brief, burst of molecular creativity.
In short, the adjacent possible would explode rapidly, but everything around would bite the dust. If cells were supracritical, propagating organization would poison its own propagation.
The fact that cells almost certainly are not supracritical and that the biosphere as a homogenized whole, via the Noah’s Vessel experiment, clearly is supracritical, means that the fact that each cell is somewhat isolated from the other and that each has bounded molecular diversity is not an accident. Were it not so, we would not be here.
But what of a microbial community? Consider such a community with N species. As the diversity of species increases, the total molecular diversity of the community increases. At some point, the community as a whole might become chemically supracritical. A novel molecular species, Q, introduced into one species would be sequestered, leave the cell unchanged and be taken up by other cells or lost in the soil, or undergo a reaction to form a known or a novel species. At some diversity of species  N and some rich onslaught of novel molecular species, Q, R, S ,   .   .   .     the community will become supracritical. At that stage, molecular diversity in the community increases rapidly. If concentrations of novel molecular species are high enough, say nanomolar or picomolar, then some of the N species will be poisoned. The species diversity of the local community will fall. Presumably, this process can suce such that the diversity of a causally connected local community falls suciently low that the community is not supracritical.
The inverse argument allows the diversity of the community to increase by immigration or mutation of current members. This suggests a possible tendency of local communities to move toward the subcritical-supracritical boundary.
In short, an endogenous process almost certainly limits the rate of generation of molecular diversity such that cells and local communities are not supracritical. The rate of generation of molecular novelty must be suciently slow that natural selection can work on heritable variants to pick winners from losers. The point I am making is that it seems reasonable that endogenous processes in local communities gate the rate of exploration of the molecular adjacent possible, keeping it slow enough that natural selection can persistently pick current winners from losers. If so, the biosphere gates its own rate of entry into the molecular adjacent possible. On these arguments, the biosphere may advance into the adjacent possible as fast as it can get away with doing so.
Indeed, it is helpful to frame the current discussion as a generalization of a famous phase transition discussed by Manfred Eigen and Peter Schuster called the “error catastrophe.” Eigen and Schuster were considering a population of replicators, say viruses or bacteria, evolving on a fitness landscape with many peaks of high fitness, valleys of low fitness, and ridges. In general, if the mutation rate is low enough, a population located at one point on the landscape will have a few mutants, one or two of which are fitter. These will replicate faster than the less fit cousins, eventually replacing them, so the population as a whole will move to the new point of higher fitness on the landscape. If the process is continued, the population will climb steadfastly uphill to a local fitness peak and remain in its vicinity.
But if the mutation rate is then gradually increased, at some point the population “melts” o the fitness peak and wanders away across the fitness landscape. This melting is the error catastrophe phase transition. Eigen and Schuster elegantly relate the known mutation rates of viruses to the sizes of their genomes and show that viruses are close to but below the error threshold where selection can still overcome the melting. Bacteria, which are metabolically far more complex that viruses, are even more conservative than viruses; their mutation rate is well below the error catastrophe. It is not known why bacteria and higher cells have a mutation rate so far below the error catastrophe. Perhaps were the mutation rate of bacteria higher their communities would become supracritical. And that would be lethal.
Thus, the bounding of mutation rates and community diversity suggests that cells and communities avoid being supracritical, which in turn bounds and gates the entry into the adjacent possible by any local community. On the other hand, the biosphere as a whole is comprised of many dierent local communities. The rate of exploration of the adjacent possible globally must be bounded such that a generalized Eigen-Schuster error catastrophe, melting the population or community away from adequate organization to survive and propagate, does not occur.
All of this suggests the hypothesis that a biosphere expands into the adjacent possible, as a secular trend, about as fast as it can get away with such exploration, subject to the requirement that selection must on average be strong enough and fast enough to slightly more than oset the rate of exploration of novelty.
It is interesting that the same feature may occur in the economy as a whole. We hear of future shock. Roughly, what we fear is that the rate of technological change will overwhelm us. But will it? Or is there a self-regulating mechanism that gates our rate of entry into the technological adjacent possible?
The latter, I think. Consider this: Why does an innovation get itself introduced? Because someone thinks he or she can make money introducing that innovation. But if the person or firm making the innovation and introducing it to the global or village markets faced a product life cycle that was so very rapid that neither they nor others in the economy could absorb the innovations and make livings, the firms in question would go broke. We will only broach the technological adjacent possible at that rate at which we can make a living doing so. We gate our entry into the technological future.
Thus, it appears that the biosphere and the econosphere have endogenous mechanisms that gate the exploration of the adjacent possible such that, on average, such explorations do successfully find new ways of making a living, new natural and business games, at a rate that can be selected by natural selection, or its economic analogue of success or failure, at a rate that is sustainable. It is a further plausible hypothesis that the rate of exploration of the adjacent possible endogenously converges to the rate that is maximally sustainable.
I close this chapter with a surprising calculation and conjecture by Harold Morowitz, a biophysicist at George Mason University. Morowitz considers the atoms that form organic molecules, C, H, N, O, P, S: carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulphur. He then considers molecules of these elements and the kinds of bonds that can form between the elements. There are two kinds of bonds, chain-terminating bonds, like a terminal hydroxyl group, -OH, and chain-extending bonds, like C=C. Chain-extending bonds will tend to make a molecular system with many kinds of molecules even more diverse. Chain-terminating bonds will tend to limit the diversity of molecular species that can form.
Morowitz then considers the equilibrium ratio of chain-extending bonds to all bonds, chain-extending plus chain-terminating, that would occur as a function of temperature, or equivalently, the energy per unit volume of the system. At very high temperatures, the system is a plasma, and chain-terminating bonds are vastly more predominant at equilibrium than chain-extending bonds. At very low temperatures, chain-terminating bonds predominate overwhelmingly.
If one plots the equilibrium ratio of chain-extending bonds to all bonds as a function of temperature, or energy per unit volume, the curve goes up, reaches a single peak, then trends downward. Thus, there is an optimal temperature, or energy per unit volume, where the equilibrium ratio of bonds maximizes the ratio of chain-extending chemical bonds to all bonds. Morowitz’s remarkable conclusion is that the maximum of this curve, where chain-extending bonds are as abundant as possible at equilibrium, corresponds quite closely to the average energy per unit volume of the biosphere of the Earth!
Even if the calculation is crude, I find this result deeply interesting. It suggests that, somehow, the biosphere has achieved an energy per unit volume such that at equilibrium chain-extending bonds are maximized. But this means that the energy requirements to form a biosphere of high molecular diversity are minimized!
It is as if the biosphere has managed to get itself to an energy per unit volume that permits the maximum expansion of molecular diversity and, thus, the maximum expansion of the workspace of the biosphere. How might that happen? We can consider the plausible versions of the Gaia hypothesis in which a simple model planet has black or white daisies. The relative abundances of these tunes the albedo, or reflective power, of the planet, hence, the fraction of solar energy absorbed by the biosphere. Simple models show that the ratio of black and white daisies can evolve to maximize their joint fitness, thereby tuning the energy per unit volume of the biosphere.
Morowitz’s calculation should be taken cautiously. My conclusions based on his almost back-of-the-envelope calculation should be taken even more cautiously. The arguments are cogent but unestablished. On the other hand, the biosphere has exploded in molecular diversity, the workspace of the biosphere has expanded, the adjacent possible of the biosphere has expanded. It is certainly interesting if the energy per unit volume of the biosphere is roughly that which makes this expansion as energetically inexpensive as possible for the autonomous agents coevolving with one another, exapting to new forms of making a living playing natural games, as we coconstruct our biosphere.
In summary, I hold out the very interesting conjecture that the biosphere as a whole evolves as a secular trend to expand its workspace, including the dimensionality of the adjacent possible as fast as is sustainably possible. If so, we have broached a tentative law for any biosphere. In the next chapter I discuss three further candidate laws. Treat all of them with great caution. It is enough if at this stage we can even begin to formulate tentative laws for all biospheres. A general biology is hardly begun, let alone explored.




Chapter 8
Candidate Laws for the Coconstruction of a Biosphere
or the purpose of our discussion here, grant that molecular autonomous agents propagate organization and evolve by the roughly familiar Darwinian aegis of mutation and selection. These agents  coevolving with one another, discovering displacements from equilibrium that can be used to accomplish work, making records of such sources of energy, then linking those exergonic reactions to endergonic reactions  are the means by which our biosphere has come into being, actually coconstructed by the activities, accidents, striving, and failures of these autonomous agents, exapting persistently into their adjacent possible.
Yes. But how does a biosphere get itself constructed? Are there laws? Are there laws that might hold for any biosphere? Laws of a general biology, wherever autonomous agents swirl into existence and change forever the begetting of the universe?
No one knows. Yet is seems reasonable to expect such laws and honorable to begin, even now, to seek them. At worst we will be wrong. Rather more stunningly, we may be right. It is surely enough if at this early state we can even begin to formulate candidate general laws. Our eorts will only improve over time.
In the present chapter, I consider four candidate general laws for any biosphere. Because the science is more advanced than some of the material in the previous chapters, I will be able to describe it in somewhat more detail. That which is more worked out is, I hope, a signature of how the glimmered science of the past seven chapters may develop.
Coevolutionarily constructible communities of molecular autonomous agents may evolve to four apparently dierent phase transitions:
Law .Communities of autonomous agents will evolve to the dynamical “edge of chaos” within and between members of the community, thereby simultaneously achieving an optimal coarse graining of each agent’s world that maximizes the capacity of each agent to discriminate and act without trembling hands.
Law .A coassembling community of agents, on a short timescale with respect to coevolution, will assemble to a self-organized critical state with some maximum number of species per community. In the vicinity of that maximum, a power law distribution of avalanches of local extinction events will occur. As the maximum is approached the net rate of entry of new species slows, then halts.
Law .On a coevolutionary timescale, coevolving autonomous agents as a community attain a self-organized critical state by tuning landscape structure (ways of making a living) and coupling between landscapes, yielding a global power law distribution of extinction and speciation events and a power law distribution of species lifetimes.
Law .Autonomous agents will evolve such that causally local communities are on a generalized “subcritical-supracritical boundary” exhibiting a generalized self-organized critical average for the sustained expansion of the adjacent possible of the eective phase space of the community.
Candidate Law 1: The Dynamical Edge of Chaos
Molecular autonomous agents, for example, free-living cells, are parallel-processing molecular dynamical systems. A bacterium such as E. coli has on the order of three thousand structural genes. The diversity of molecular species in E. coli includes perhaps a thousand small molecules in metabolism, the genes, RNA and protein species, lipids, large carbohydrates, and so forth. For the sake of argument, let’s say there are about five thousand molecular species in E. coli. Perhaps the number is larger.
A cell is a parallel-processing dynamical system. That is to say, the cell carries out a wide variety of molecular activities, including the turning on and o of transcription of genes into RNA; the processing of that RNA into mature messenger RNA; the translation of that RNA into proteins, the activities of many of those proteins as enzymes to catalyze reaction, the modification of the activities of enzymes by chemical events such as phosphorylation and dephosphorylation; the building of structural components such as bilipid membrane, and microtubule assembly and disassembly; and the construction of proteins and other receptors. These receptors are located transmembrane at the cell boundary and elsewhere in the cell, including on nuclear membranes of eukaryotes, such that signal molecules can be detected and responded to.
So, lots of activities are going on all the time, in parallel, in your typical E. coli, yeast, or your own pancreatic cells. The proper conceptual framework to think about all this activity is the “state space” of the system. If we ignore geometry, that is, the locations of molecules relative to one another in the cell  which is a big idealization  then the state space of a cell consists of a list of all the molecular species and their “activities” or “concentrations.”
In the following, I will focus on the behavior of the genetic regulatory network. It has been known since the seminal work of Jacob and Monod in and , work for which they won the Nobel Prize, that genes can turn one another on and o. In more detail, the protein made by one gene can diuse in the cell and bind to a DNA site, called a “cis acting site,” near a second gene. Genes that encode proteins are the structural genes; the binding of the protein, or several proteins at a set of nearby cis sites, can turn the second structural gene on or o. More generally, the binding of diusible factors, called “trans acting factors,” to cis sites, can tune graded rates of transcription of the nearby structural gene.
The human cell is estimated to have about eighty to a hundred thousand structural genes and between ten thousand to perhaps a hundred thousand cis acting sites. In general, any structural gene may be regulated by zero to ten dierent trans acting factors that may bind at one or more nearby cis acting sites. Therefore, the human genomic system is a highly complex web of regulatory connections and interactions by which the activities of genes turn one another on and o, or more generally tune one another’s activity.
It is the joint dynamical behavior of such genetic networks, plus the remaining cellular network of proteins and other molecular interactions, that controls cell behavior, including development from the fertilized egg to the adult.
In the past three decades, considerable theoretical insight has been achieved with respect to the expected behaviors of such large genetic regulatory networks. I discuss the relations to experimental evidence briefly below.
Boolean Networks
To take a very simple case, we consider the N genes of a cell and idealize further to imagine that at any moment in time a gene is either actively transcribing into RNA, with active = , or it is not transcribing, so is inactive, hence . Thus, the genes are treated as binary, or “Boolean,” variables. A Boolean network is a model genetic network with N binary, or Boolean, genes, each receiving regulatory inputs from some among the N genes and each governed by a Boolean function on its inputs telling the activities of its inputs for which it should turn on or o.
The Boolean idealization is severe, but it is a very useful place to start. If the human genome has , structural genes and each can be on or o, then the number of possible patterns, or “states,” of gene activity in the human genome is a staggering , or about ,. That is, a human cell could, in principle, be in any one of a , states of gene activity. Its state space is ,. There has only been seconds since the big bang. If it took merely a second to turn a gene on or o, then no human cell could have explored more than an infinitesimally tiny fraction of its state space, ,, even if it had been chugging along since the big bang.
That cannot be what cells do. Something must confine their “flow” in their state space. And, indeed, what confines their flow is precisely the genetic regulatory network by which genes turn one another on and o.
Very good work shows that such networks can exist in three broad regimes: an ordered regime, a chaotic regime, and near a phase transition between order and chaos. All the evidence suggests that cells have evolved to lie in the ordered regime, fairly near the edge of chaos. Communities of cells may lie even closer to the edge of chaos. The hypothesis that cells and communities of cells lie in the ordered regime near the phase transition to chaos is candidate law .
To understand this candidate law, I need to describe to you the structure and behaviors of model genetic networks. Thereby we can characterize the ordered, chaotic, and edge-of-chaos regimes.
To take a very simple case, we consider a cell with three genes, A, B, and C. In this simplest Boolean idealization, there are three genes, each of which can be on or o, hence, there are two raised to the third, or eight possible states of gene activities: (), (), (), (), (), (), (), (), where the ordering of the three symbols stands for the activity states of ABC, respectively.
The most general description of a dynamical system consists in specifying its state space, then identifying for each state which state or states it changes into. For a deterministic dynamical system, each state changes into a unique successor state. For a nondeterministic system, single states can change to two or more successor states. Which of the successor states is chosen in the nondeterministic system is given by some random process such as flipping a coin.
Figure .a shows an arbitrary deterministic state space among the eight states of three genes, A, B, C. For each state, I have chosen its successor state at random.
Figure .a shows several characteristic features of these very simple Boolean dynamical systems. First, note that the system is parallel processing. More than a single gene changes its activity value from to or to on many of the state transitions. Next, there is a finite number of states, here, eight. Each state has a unique successor. Over time, if the system is released from any initial state, it will follow a trajectory of states through state space. Since there is a finite number of states, eventually the trajectory must hit a state previously encountered on the trajectory. But the system is deterministic, thus once the trajectory reenters a state previously encountered, it will follow a recurrent loop of states in state space, called a “state cycle.”
In general, the length of a state cycle can be a single state that reenters itself, a “steady state,” or all of the states in the state space may lie on a single, long cycle that traverses all the states of the state space or state cycles may be any length between these two limits.
A second typical property of such a parallel-processing Boolean system is that more than one state cycle may exist. In the present example, three state cycles exist in the state space.
State cycles are called “attractors” because they typically attract the flow of other states into themselves. This is shown in the first state cycle, where the states () and () flow into the state cycle, but are not on it. These two states are called “transients.” Transient states are encountered on trajectories flowing to state cycle attractors, but are not encountered again once the attractor is reached, assuming no perturbations occur to the system.
The set of states flowing into a state cycle attractor plus that state cycle is called the “basin of attraction” of the attractor.
The set of attractors are jointly the asymptotic long-term alternative behaviors of the network. If released from any initial state, the system ultimately winds up cycling on one of its attractors.
Thus in discrete-valued deterministic networks  here, binary ones  each state lies in a single basin of attraction, so the basins of attraction partition the state space into disjoint sets of states.
The simple example of Figure .b allows us to show another feature of such synchronous Boolean networks  here, synchronous means that all the binary variables change value at the same clocked moment. Since each state has a unique successor state, we can write a table of all the states and for each, its unique successor.
Figure .b shows the state transitions for each state, at time T, to the state it transforms to one clocked moment later, at time T + .
But Figure .b also shows for each gene, in order (ABC), the Boolean rule, or Boolean function, of the three genes, A, B, C, that turns each on and o as a function of the values of itself and the other two genes.
As it happens, genes A and B have Boolean functions that depend on all three genes, A, B, and C. By examination, however, gene C has a Boolean function that depends only on genes A and C, not on gene B. To say that the activity of gene C depends only on A and C and not B means that once the combinations of activities of A and C are defined at a moment T, the next activity of C at T + is indepen-dent of whether B is on or o at time T. Indeed, the Boolean function is C = (not A or not C); that is, gene C will turn on at the next moment if at the current moment either A is not active or C is not active or both are not active.
From Figure .c, after simplifying Boolean expressions as we just did for gene C, we can write down the “wiring diagram” of inputs among the three genes. Since A and B depend upon all three genes, each receives a regulatory input from all three genes. Gene C, however, receives inputs only from itself and gene A.
The combination of Figures .d and .c, respectively, shows for each gene the inputs to that gene and the logical or Boolean function by which it turns on and o. Thus, the combination of .c and d is the genetic network among the genes.
Order, Chaos, and the Edge of Chaos
As noted above, thirty years of work by many scientists  initially on synchronous Boolean networks but now generalized to a wider family of model genetic systems, including some where genes can exhibit continuously graded levels of activity as their inputs turn gradually up or down  all show the same simple, general results: There are three broad regimes of behavior. A number of very simple properties of networks, involving connectivity of the network and simple biases on the Boolean functions, control which regime a network lies in.
The Ordered Regime
Figure . shows a hypothetical movie of a network in the ordered regime. Let the network be released from an arbitrary initial state and flow along a trajectory toward a state cycle attractor. If a gene is rapidly turning on and o, or twinkling, call it green. If the gene is frozen in the active or frozen in the inactive value for a long time, say, fifty state transitions or more, call it red. In particular, once the system is on its state cycle, the twinkling genes that turn on and o on the state cycle would be green and those genes frozen on or frozen o, red.
Initially, just after release from some random initial state, most genes are twinkling, hence green. As the network approaches its state cycle, more and more genes turn red, hence are frozen on or frozen o. By the time the system has reached its state cycle attractor, the majority of the genes are colored red (Figure .a).
Most critically, if one considers the subset of red genes, they form a giant “percolating cluster” whose size scales linearly with the size of the entire network. In eect, the frozen red component is a “frozen red sea,” which spans the entire network and typically leaves behind isolated twinkling green islands.
The Chaotic Regime
In the chaotic regime, the same movie shows that the majority of the genes remain green, twinkling on and o (Figure .c). So a vast, twinkling green sea spans the network, typically leaving behind isolated frozen red islands.
The Edge of Chaos
As parameters of the network discussed below are tuned from the chaotic regime toward the ordered regime, the green percolating sea becomes smaller and eventually fragments into two or many isolated green islands. The point of fragmentation of the green sea into green islands constitutes a phase transition from the chaotic to the ordered regime. This phase transition is sometimes called the edge of chaos (Figure .b).
Several critical features distinguish the ordered from the chaotic regime. In the ordered regime, the lengths of state cycle attractors scales polynomially with the number of genes. Remarkably, in the ordered regime near the phase transition to chaos there is evidence for universal scaling in which the number of states on a state cycle scales as the square root of the number of genes. This scaling, which I first discovered over thirty years ago, still staggers me. If the human genome has , genes, it has a state space of , or , states. Yet if the human genomic system lies in the ordered regime near the phase transition to chaos, it will settle down and cycle among the square root of ,, or about states!
Now, states is very very small compared to ,. The overwhelming order of the ordered regime, I believe, keeps cells from wandering all over their state spaces for eternities beyond eternities. In fact, it takes about one to ten minutes to turn a eukaryotic gene on or o, so it would take a cell from to , minutes, or from about . hours to about hours, to traverse its state cycle attractor. This is right in the biological ballpark. For example, the cell division cycle of dierent human cell types is in the range of to hours.
By contrast, in the chaotic regime state cycle lengths scale exponentially with the size of the network. The deepest one can go into the chaotic regime is to assign at random the successor state for each state. In that case, in general, each gene is a Boolean function of all N genes. In this case, the typical state cycle length is the square root of the number of states in the state space. For the human genome with , states, a typical state cycle length would be the square root, hence ,. Remember, it is only seconds since the big bang. State cycle attractors of lengths ,? Not in my body, thank you very much.
In the first two articles I wrote on the subject of random Boolean nets, as long ago as and , I plotted cell cycle lengths from organisms as diverse as bacteria, yeast, worms, plants, and simple and complex animals. These progressively more complex organisms have progressively more DNA per cell and more genes per cell. If the Boolean net theory is on the right track, and if cell cycles are a reasonable proxy for expected state cycle times as a function of the number of genes, then cell cycle time should scale as a square root function of the number of genes. This prediction is actually pretty much correct. Indeed, a plot of median cell cycle time versus total DNA per cell is a square root function from bacteria to human cells.
But there are caveats: The number of genes in cells may not be proportional to the amount of DNA per cell. Some DNA is “junk.” A plausible estimate of the number of genes per cell is now available for many organisms. On this basis, cell cycle time scales somewhere between a square root and a linear  that is, directly proportional  function of estimated genes per cell. So without yet invoking natural selection to tune the structure and logic, the theory of random Boolean nets is already quite close to the data.
A second critical feature that distinguishes the ordered from the chaotic regime is what happens when the activity of a single gene is transiently reversed. I would note that such transient reversals happen all the time in normal development. For example, a single hormone enters a cell, then the nucleus, then binds to a nuclear genetic site and transiently changes the activity of some gene. Typically, the results unleash a cascade of alterations of gene activities. These cascades of alterations guide development and cell dierentiation. In the ordered regime, these cascades tend to be smallish. In the chaotic regime, the cascades are typically huge. In real cells, the cascades tend to be smallish. More, we can actually predict their size distribution.
Let’s define a gene as “damaged” if after an initial gene has had its activity reversed for a single moment the gene in question ever behaves dierently than it would have had the perturbed gene been left undisturbed. In eect, damage shows that perturbation of a gene aects the behavior of the damaged gene. Imagine damaged genes purple. If a gene has misbehaved once, it is purple, whether it stops misbehaving or keeps misbehaving.
Given this definition of damage, we can consider in detail two identical copies of a network, in the same state, running at the same speed. Now pick a model gene at random. If it is on, flip it o. It is o, flip it on. Color it purple since you have damaged it.
Now watch the unperturbed and perturbed copies of the network, and consider purple any gene that ever does something dierent in the perturbed network compared to the unperturbed network. In general, you will see a purple avalanche spread out from the initially perturbed gene. The purple avalanche will spread out in some way, then must eventually stop. For example, at a maximum, all the genes turn purple. Thus, we can define the size of a given damage avalanche as the number of genes that turned purple, hence misbehaved at least once.
In the ordered regime, something magic happens. If one of the frozen red genes is perturbed, typically no avalanche spreads from that purple gene. If an avalanche spreads at all, it is tiny.
By contrast, if a twinkling green gene in one of the isolated green islands is perturbed and turned purple, a purple avalanche spreads to some or all of the twinkling green genes in that island. But the avalanche stops at the boundaries of the green island since damage avalanches cannot propagate through the frozen red percolating sea.
Because purple avalanches cannot propagate through the frozen red percolating sea, the green islands are functionally isolated from one another. The consequence is that there is a characteristic size distribution of avalanches in the ordered regime and a very dierent distribution in the chaotic regime.
Figure .a schematizes the distribution of avalanches for networks in the ordered regime very near the phase transition to chaos. The figure plots the logarithm of the size of the avalanche on the x-axis and the logarithm of the number of instances of avalanches of each size on the y-axis. As you can see, the size distribution shows up as a straight line in this log log plot, sloping down to the right. Hence, the distribution is a power law distribution, with many small and few large avalanches of change propagating through the network. In addition, there is a finite cuto and thus a largest-size avalanche, which seems to scale as a square root function of the total number of genes in the network. Deeper in the ordered regime, the size distribution of avalanches remains a power law, but the slope down to the right becomes steeper, so there are fewer big avalanches compared to small avalanches.
If a human genome is in the ordered regime near the phase transition to chaos and harbors some , genes, then the largest avalanches should be about two times the square root of the number of genes, hence x , or about genes. This is probably about right. In the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, with about , genes, the largest avalanches should be about twice the square root of ,, or x , or . The largest avalanche I am aware of occurs when the moulting hormone ecdysone acts on the salivary glands and induces changes in about of the “pus” in the polytene chromosomes. If each pu is a single gene, as most geneticists think, then ecdysone unleashes an avalanche altering the activities of genes.
No comparative data yet show whether the size distribution of avalanches in real organisms is a power law, nor whether the largest avalanches scale as a square root function of the number of genes in the organism. But these hypotheses are fully testable using today’s experimental techniques.
Nevertheless, these predictions do roughly fit one’s expectation as a biologist. Most genes if perturbed should unleash no avalanches or just small avalanches, fewer genes should unleash larger avalanches, and some modest fraction of the genes at most should be open to alteration by transient alteration in the activity of any single gene. Thus, this typical, or “generic,” behavior of parallel-processing networks in the ordered regime closely fits the known data and our informed intuitions.
The chaotic regime contrasts starkly with the ordered regime. Its expected behaviors are not biologically plausible. The chaotic regime diers from the ordered regime for a simple reason. In the chaotic regime, the twinkling green sea percolates. If a single green gene is perturbed and turned purple, that perturbation usually unleashes a purple avalanche that spreads through much of the percolating green sea. Huge damage avalanches are unleashed by single gene perturbations.
These huge avalanches are exactly the signature of the famous “butterfly eect” seen in the weather, where a small initial change can have large-scale consequences. In short, the spreading purple avalanches constitute “sensitivity to initial conditions.” On the other hand, it is important to distinguish between low-dimensional chaos, characterized by three or four variables governed by three or four equations, and the high-dimensional chaos, shown in large-model genetic networks with tens of thousands of gene variables. In high-dimensional networks of genes modeled as binary variables, chaos shows up as the enormous avalanches of damage that spread from one to many of the variables of the model network.
Figure .b schematizes the size distribution of avalanches in the chaotic regime. Unlike the ordered regime, there is a spike of huge avalanches where to percent of the genes are damaged. In a cell, this would correspond to a hormone changing the activity of a single gene and , to , genes downstream changing their activities. This does not happen.
As in the ordered regime, however, in the chaotic regime there is also a power law distribution of small avalanches, present in addition to the vast avalanches that rocket through the green sea. Presumably, these small avalanches occur when green genes near the filigreed “coasts” of red frozen islands are perturbed and the purple avalanche is trapped on the fingers of the red beaches.
A third feature, a convergence versus divergence along flows in state space that characterizes the ordered versus chaotic regime, is perhaps the most important to our future discussions. In the ordered regime, initially nearby states lie on trajectories that tend to converge in state space. In the chaotic regime, initially nearby states tend to lie on trajectories that diverge in state space. At the edge of chaos, initially nearby states tend to lie on trajectories that neither converge nor diverge in state space.
These behaviors are conveniently shown in a recurrence map, which I call a “Derrida curve” since physicist Bernard Derrida of Saclay, France, first showed it to me. In Derrida and Pomeau were also the first to find analytic proof of the ordered and chaotic regimes and the phase transition between them.
Consider two states of a Boolean network with five genes and the successors to each of those states:
state () ’ () state ’
state () ’ () state ’
We can define the “Hamming distance” between state and state , the number of binary variables by which the two states dier. Here the Hamming distance is , since gene is in state and in state . In addition, we can define the normalized Hamming distance, Dt, between these two initial states at time t as the fraction of binary variables by which they dier. Hence, Dt is / =.  Similarly, we can define the normalized Hamming distance between the two successor states at time t + . In the case above, D(t + ) = / =. 
Then we can compare Dt and D(t + ) and ask if the initial distance at time T decreased or increased at time T + . In the current case, the initial distance increased from . to . at the next moment, T + . In short, the two initially nearby states, diering in the activity of a single gene, spread further apart one moment later. Indeed, this spreading is the first time step of the spreading of a purple avalanche of damage.
To characterize Boolean networks with respect to the ordered and chaotic regime, it is convenient to take thousands of random pairs of states at dierent initial distances, Dt, where Dt can vary from . to.  For each pair of initial states, run the Boolean network forward one moment, discover the two successor states of the two initial states, and compute D(t + ) for that pair of initial states. Average the D(t + ) values for the thousands of pairs of initial states at each initial distance, Dt. The typical results are shown in Figure. 
Figure . is a recurrence map, with Dt shown on the x-axis, D(t + ) shown on the y-axis. Thus, for an initial pair of states at Dt = ., if the successor states have spread apart, say to D(t + ) = ., a dot in the xy plane at x = ., y = . records this event. The averaged set of these dots for the thousands of pairs of initial states at all dierent initial distances is the average recurrence map for the network.
In Figure ., the main diagonal, running at a -degree angle from the lower-left corner, which corresponds to Dt = and D(t + ) = , shows the condition where D(t + ) = Dt. If a dot lies on the main diagonal, then the distance between the initial states is the same as the distance between the successor states. The two initial states lie on trajectories that neither diverge nor converge in state space.
In the chaotic regime, nearby states lie on trajectories that diverge further apart in state space, so the recurrence map lies above the main diagonal for small initial distances. For large initial distances, even networks in the chaotic regime have the property that states tend to lie on trajectories that converge. The degree to which the Derrida recurrence curve lies above the main diagonal for small Dt is a measure of how deeply into the chaotic regime the network lies. Deep into the chaotic regime, nearby states, hence small Dt, diverge swiftly. Thus, the recurrence curve is well above the main diagonal for small values of Dt.
By contrast, in the ordered regime, as shown in Figure ., the Derrida recurrence curve is below the main diagonal for small Dt, that is, initial states that are close lie on trajectories that converge. At the phase transition between order and chaos, the Derrida recurrence curve begins, at Dt = , tangent to the main diagonal, then falls below it as Dt increases.
In summary, in the ordered regime, nearby states tend to lie on trajectories that converge in state space. At the phase transition, nearby states tend to lie on trajectories that neither converge nor diverge. In the chaotic regime, nearby states tend to diverge.
As I will shortly discuss below, it is plausible to think that autonomous agents, and communities of autonomous agents, evolve such that they lie in the ordered regime near the phase transition to chaos. A major reason for this intuition is that under such circumstances flow in state space is mildly convergent. In turn, this will allow the autonomous agents to make the maximum number of reliable discriminations and reliable actions, hence, to play the most sophisticated natural games by which to earn their livings.
The three features that characterize the phase transition between order and chaos seem by good numerical evidence to coincide. That is, when parameters discussed below are tuned from the chaotic to the ordered regime such that the green sea is just breaking up into green islands, simultaneously, the Derrida curve changes from the chaotic regime to become tangent with the main diagonal for small values of Dt. And at just this point, state cycle lengths switch from scaling exponentially to scaling polynomially with the number of genes.
At least three simple parameters tune whether networks are in the ordered or chaotic regimes. Therefore it is important that evolution can readily tune whether genomic systems lie in the ordered or chaotic regime by tuning any of these three parameters. Even more important, evolution seems to have done just that and tuned cells into the ordered regime. Since cells are our only example of evolved autonomous agents, the data support my candidate first law that autonomous agents and communities of autonomous agents will evolve to the ordered regime near the phase transition to chaos.
The simplest parameter to tune is the number of inputs, K, per gene. I showed numerically in , and Derrida and Pomeau showed analytically in , that if K = or less, networks lie in the ordered regime. Derrida and Pomeau showed that K = is the edge of chaos phase transition. For K greater than , networks lie in the chaotic regime.
Already this is worth the excited attention I gave it so long ago. For the results show that a network with randomly chosen logic nevertheless behaves with exquisite order. Say, a network of , genes is constructed at random, with the simple limitation that each model gene have K = inputs but that the wiring diagram be chosen at random, and the Boolean function assigned to each gene among the possible Boolean functions of K = inputs is also chosen, once and for all, at random, this spaghetti mess of a network with its tangle of , wires connecting the genes in some mad scramble will straighten itself out.
The system settles down to cycle among about states out of , or ,! Order for free, I keep saying. Selection need not struggle against all odds to achieve cells that behave with overwhelming order. That order lies to hand for selection’s further craftings.
There are two further known parameters that can tune networks from the chaotic to the ordered regime if K is greater than . Both are biases on the Boolean functions. Remarkably, real cells show dramatic evidence of one of these two biases, which I call “canalyzing Boolean functions.” I discuss this canalyzing bias second.
The first bias is characterized by a parameter Derrida and colleagues called “P.” Consider in Figure .c, the Boolean function for gene A. It has five values and three values. The parameter P is defined as the number of instances of the majority value over the full set of cases. Hence, P for gene A = /. For gene B, the Boolean function has seven values and one value. Its P is /. For gene C there are six values and two values. Its P is /.
By definition, P for a Boolean function can vary from . to ., when the majority fraction varies from half to all the possible cases. Derrida and colleagues showed that, in general, when K > , P can be tuned upward from . to some critical value, Pc, where networks pass from the chaotic to the ordered regime. The critical value of P as a function of K is shown in Figure .a. Universal scaling for cycle lengths as a square root function of the number of genes has been established along the phase transition in the PK plane.
The second bias in Boolean functions are the canalyzing Boolean functions. Consider gene C in Figure .c. If gene A is , gene C will be at the next moment no matter what the activities of gene B or C may be. If gene A is , gene C may be or at the next moment, depending on the prior state of gene C itself.
Gene C is governed by a canalyzing Boolean function. Canalyzing Boolean functions have at least one input with at least one value that suces to guarantee the next state of the regulated gene, regardless of the values of all other inputs. By inspection, if A is now, then C is guaranteed to be a moment later. So the Boolean function is canalyzing, and I call A a canalyzing input to C. Note that gene C is also a canalyzing input to gene C.
Look next at the Boolean function for gene B in Figure .c. If gene A is , then gene B is sure to be the next moment, regardless of the activities of B and C. So A is a canalyzing input to B. But if B is , that too assures that B will be at the next moment. So B is a canalyzing input to itself. And similarly, if gene C is , gene B is sure to be the next moment. Gene B has three canalyzing inputs. By contrast, gene A in Figure .c has no canalyzing input, so is not a canalyzing Boolean function. No value of A alone, B alone, or C alone suces to guarantee the next activity of gene A.
In general, Boolean functions of K inputs may have ,,,   .   .   .     K canalyzing inputs. Numerical evidence shows that, for K > inputs per gene, a sucient bias toward a high fraction of genes with a sucient number of canalyzing inputs drives networks from the chaotic into the ordered regime. Figure .b shows the phase transition curve in the CK plane.
Before turning back to biology, it is essential to stress that the results noted above for synchronous Boolean networks extend to asynchronous Boolean networks and, more critically, extend to a family of model gene networks in which the genes have graded levels of activity. This is important because the on-o Boolean idealization is quite severe. Real genes show graded levels of activities as a function of the concentrations of their trans acting inputs and the bound states of their cis regulatory loci. If our results were fragile in that they depended upon the Boolean, on-o idealization, we could not trust them to inform us about real cells. Glass and Hill have examined a model with continuously graded levels of gene activity, the “piecewise linear model,” and found the same qualitative behaviors. In particular, the same phase transition occurs as a function of K, P, and C. The striking dierence, however, is that deep in the ordered regime of the piecewise linear case, the genes of the twinkling green islands settle down to steady states that dier on dierent attractors. Near the phase transition to chaos, the green islands begin to exhibit sustained “limit cycle” oscillations that become chaotic in the chaotic regime.
Thus, there is now good general evidence that the ordered and chaotic regimes and the phase transition between them are deeply characteristic of some enormous class of parallel-processing nonlinear dynamical systems.
The Biology
But what of real cells? We have no conclusive evidence, yet an abundance of telling hints. If I am not yet entirely convinced and if I am  as I am  biased, I nevertheless become increasingly confident that cells, and probably communities of cells, do live in the ordered regime near the edge of chaos. Not only does the evidence point this way, but cells should live near the edge of chaos. Why? As remarked already, the intuition is simple. Being autonomous agents, cells must, as individuals living in communities, make the maximum number of reliable discriminations possible and act on them reliably, without “trembling hands.” Just inside the edge of chaos seems the ideal place.
Intuitively, slightly convergent flow in state space allows classification, for when two states converge on a single successor state, those two states have been classified as “equivalent” by the network. Slightly convergent flow would seem to allow the maximum number of reliable classifications in the face of a noisy environment. The convergent flow buers the system against the noise of the environment.
And what of trembling hands? No point making superb discriminations, seeing the stag deer, drawing your bow, aiming the arrow, then shooting yourself in the foot. Again, slightly convergent flow in state space to buer external and internal noise seems ideal.
So what about cells? My colleagues Steven Harris, Bruce Sawhill, and Andrew Wuensche, and I have carried out work over the past several years that has analyzed actual gene regulatory rules for eukaryotic genes drawn from a variety of eukaryotic organisms  yeast, Drosophila, maize, mouse, and so forth. The results show a very strong statistical bias in favor of genes governed disproportionately by canalyzing Boolean functions. When we have constructed model networks with the observed bias toward canalyzing functions, such networks lie modestly in the ordered regime by the Derrida curve and other criteria noted above.
It all began at the Santa Fe Institute several years ago. Steve Harris, a molecular biologist from Texas was visiting. I told him about canalyzing functions. “Never,” said Steve. Seeing my opportunity I replied, “You have a good genetics library, want to read a bunch of papers and analyze the transcription rules of genes with three or four or five known regulatory inputs?”
I didn’t think Steve would say yes, for the reading of over a hundred papers in the subsequent years, and cataloging the detailed results, was going to be a substantial task.
“Sure,” he replied.
Some months later, Harris called. “Hey, the results for genes with K = inputs look interesting! There is a bias toward canalyzing functions.”
“Never,” I said.
“I’ll send the data,” was the reply.
Steve had carefully read about sixty papers on regulated genes with K = known inputs, where the data was available at the level of actual binding of trans acting factors to cis sites and the turning on of transcription. A gene with K = known inputs has, in the Boolean idealization, to the rd, or , possible on-o states of those inputs, as we have seen. In virtually all the cases used, Steve had good data for all eight input states. He warranted the Boolean idealization had its problems, but found that in many cases the response of a gene was nonlinear to its inputs. Thus, gene A might be turned on percent by factor and percent by factor , but percent by both factors at the same concentration. It looks like the Boolean “and” function, where the regulated gene is “on” at the next moment only if both inputs are “on” now.
We need some mathematical facts. The number of Boolean functions of K inputs is to the to the K, (K). For K = , there are Boolean functions. For K = , there are Boolean functions. For K = , there are , Boolean functions. For K = , there are over a billion Boolean functions.
A Boolean function with K inputs, as noted, can have , , ,   .   .   .    K canalyzing inputs. But, as K increases, the number of Boolean functions that are canalyzing at all, on or more inputs, declines dramatically, as shown in Figure.  In particular, . percent of the Boolean functions of K = inputs are canalyzing. But only percent of the Boolean functions of K = inputs are canalyzing. Only percent of the , Boolean functions of K = inputs are canalyzing. Only less than percent of the billion or so Boolean functions of K = inputs are canalyzing.
This shift means that we can test if there is a bias in sampled eukaryotic genes. Indeed, in more detail, among the K = Boolean functions, percent have no canalyzing inputs and a decreasing fraction of the Boolean functions have , , or canalyzing inputs, as you can see in Figure. 
Also plotted on Figure . is the observed fraction of eukaryotic genes with K = inputs. The observed curve is the opposite from the curve expected if K = genes were regulated by Boolean rules drawn at random from among the functions. Indeed, fully percent of the observed cases have canalyzing inputs, while the expected fraction would be only peercent if rules were drawn at random.
One does not need fancy statistics, but they readily confirm that the observed distribution is sharply shifted to large numbers of canalyzing inputs per gene. Figure . shows similar results for genes with K = known inputs. Again, the shift toward genes regulated with a high number of canalyzing inputs is apparent and strongly statistically significant. Data for K = and K = genes shows the same bias, but the cases are too few to be statistically significant.
But there remains analysis to be done. Recall the P parameter. Networks with high P values, where genes are mostly turned on or turned o by their inputs, also lie in the ordered regime. Moreover, there is an overlap but nonidentity between the classes of Boolean functions of high P values and Boolean functions with or more canalyzing inputs. When we analyzed our samples of genes, they also had high P values compared to a random distribution of Boolean functions with K = or K = inputs.
In order to discriminate whether the observed bias was toward high canalyzing inputs or high P values or both, we carried out a “residual analysis.” That is, we classified all K = Boolean functions into dierent P classes, P = /, P = /, P = /, P = /. Within each P class, some Boolean functions have , , , or canalyzing inputs. Therefore, among all the Boolean functions for K = within a given P class, there is some distribution of Boolean functions with , , , or canalyzing inputs. Thus, we asked, within a given P class, if the real genes showed a residual bias toward a high number of canalyzing inputs per gene compared to what would happen if real genes were governed by Boolean rules drawn at random with respect to canalization. The answer for K = and K = genes is overwhelmingly yes.
In short, if we control for P classes, there is a very strong and very statistically significant residual bias toward high numbers of canalyzing inputs per gene. Conversely, when we controlled for canalyzing input classes and tested for a residual bias toward high P values, there was no sign whatsoever of such a bias. Thus, it appears that evolution has, in fact, tuned the choices of Boolean rules used to govern genes with K = and K = known inputs, as well as genes with K = and K = inputs that we have sampled, sharply in favor of a high bias toward usage of Boolean rules that are canalyzing functions.
The main caveat to hold in mind, in addition to misreading the articles or the articles being a nonrandom sample of published data, is that genes governed by canalyzing functions may have more easily detected genetic eects, hence, be noticed and studied. Only future work with randomly chosen structural genes will overcome this source of bias. Despite the caveat, I am quite convinced by the data. In particular, genes governed by high P values would also have easily detected genetic eects, yet there is no such bias in the data.
Tentatively, eukaryotic genes are governed by rules biased toward many canalyzing inputs per gene. Why? Either chemical simplicity or natural selection or both, I think.
Now let’s examine the consequences. We know that networks with K = , K = , or more inputs per gene are generically in the chaotic regime if Boolean functions are chosen randomly from the full range of possible functions of K = , K = , or more inputs. We have observed a substantial bias toward canalyzing functions. Does this bias suce to tune networks with K = , or K = or more genes into the ordered regime?
Our group constructed large networks of genes, using Wuensche’s wonderful DDlab program, available on line, to examine model systems with up to , genes. When we made networks with K = or K = inputs and randomly chosen Boolean functions, their Derrida curves, as expected, were in the chaotic regime, a percolating green sea existed, and vast purple avalanches careened around the system.
When we made networks with K = or K = inputs, tuned to the exact distribution of fractions of genes with , , , , or canalyzing inputs, the results (Figure .a) show that such networks are clearly in the ordered regime. The Derrida curve is below the main diagonal. Therefore, in such networks a percolating frozen red sea exists, leaving behind isolated green islands, and the distribution of purple damage avalanches is a power law with a finite cuto at about times the square root of the number of genes (Figure .b). This last predicts that the largest avalanches of gene changes if any single gene is perturbed in humans should be about genes. This fits presently known data.
We even have tentative evidence of detailed evolutionary tuning. As the number of inputs per gene increases, a gradually decreasing fraction of the Boolean functions must be canalyzing to cross the phase transition into the ordered regime. Although the data are too few to warrant conclusion, the fraction of canalyzing inputs for K = , K = , and K = eukaryotic genes trends downward as K increases along the curve needed to remain just within the ordered regime. This decrease as K increases results in the virtual identity of the K=3 Data, K=4 Data, and K=5 Data curves in Figure 8.9a. If so, only natural selection can have tuned it thus.
There are other clues, reported in Origins of Order and At Home in the Universe in some detail, that support the hypothesis that cells lie in the ordered regime. This interpretation is based on the assumption that the dierent cell types of a higher eukaryote correspond to the dierent state cycle attractors of the network. One attractor is a liver cell, another is a kidney cell, and so forth.
•The percolating frozen core that is identical on all attractors of the Boolean network is likely to correspond to the core set of genes whose expression is known to be identical on all cell types, commonly thought to be housekeeping genes.
•The typical dierences in gene activity patterns in model cell type attractors, usually a few percent, mirror the data for real cells.
•The number of state cycle attractors robustly scales as a square root function of the number of genes in the ordered regime. The number of cell types in real cells scales as roughly a square root to a linear function of the estimated number of genes in that organism, from yeast to sponge to worm to man. Indeed, the square root of , is about , and Bruce Alberts and colleagues quote the number of cell types in humans as .
•The expected power law size distribution of avalanches of gene changes after perturbation of a single gene’s activity seems plausible and fits the still sparse data.
•Model cell types are homeostatically stable to most small perturbations. So are real cell types.
•If a state cycle attractor is a cell type, then cellular dierentiation from one to another cell type corresponds to a perturbation that causes the cell type to leave one attractor and flow to another attractor. In the ordered regime, any cell type can only directly reach a few adjacent cell types and may, by a succession of perturbations, eventually dierentiate along branching developmental pathways to a larger number of cell types. Precisely this pattern of branching dierentiation is known in all multicelled organisms.
There are other data, but perhaps that will suce. I believe the initial evidence strongly suggests that eukaryotic cells are in the ordered regime, not too far from the phase transition to chaos.
This hypothesis, which I here tentatively adopt as a candidate general law for any biosphere  a very long jump to be sure  is now open to direct tests. Current technology, based on Aymetrix chips, displays the DNA from thousands of dierent genes in a two-dimensional array. RNA can be sampled from small tissue fragments, or even single cells, and, via a few steps, caused to bind through Watson–Crick base pairing to the corresponding DNA sequence. In this way, the transcribed RNA abundances of thousands of genes can be sampled simultaneously. Thus, we can now follow the RNA states of cells over time, in normal and diseased states, treated and nontreated states, and so forth. Companies such as Incyte are doing just this and selling the data to the large pharmaceutical companies for analysis.
But then we can clone controllable cis sites such as promoters into cells at one or more randomly chosen sites and study the eects of transiently perturbing the activities of one or a few genes. Is the Derrida curve below the main diagonal or not? Does a power law distribution of avalanches of change erupt or not? We can use the data to find the genes in the same isolated green islands, for avalanches should be confined to one island and overlap if started at dierent genes in the same island. More, patterns of gene activities that change will change in correlated ways for genes in the same green island, but not for genes in dierent green islands.
Remarkably, recent evidence suggests just such correlated patterns of gene activity changes. John Welsh has analyzed the transcription patterns of almost , dierent genes in a specific cell type, the human melanocyte, from newborn children, subjected to the eight possible dierent combinations of three distinct modes of perturbation. Welsh could, in principle, distinguish increases, decreases, or no change in the abundances of gene transcripts for his nearly , genes. Of these, , showed no detectable change, about showed changes. Given eight treatment regimes, the control, and the seven other treatments consisting of all combinations of one or more of his three perturbations, in principle, there are three raised to the seventh power, or about ,, possible patterns of response. But, surprisingly, the genes showed only patterns. Already this is unexpected.
But the most interesting result is that, of the patterns, fall into eight mirror-symmetric pairs: Under some conditions, one set of genes increases in transcript abundance while a second set of genes decreases in transcript abundance. Under other of the seven perturbing conditions, the roles are reversed, and the first set of genes decreases in transcript abundance while the second set increases in transcript abundance. Welsh found eight such mirror symmetric pairs of sets of genes, suggesting at least eight dierent coordinated sets of genes, each coregulated, yet each buered from the other sets of genes.
It may be that Welsh has found the first evidence of genes lying in eight dierent green islands, buered from one another by the percolating red frozen structure. If the green islands exist, they are the paragraph structure of the genome. They are the midsize decision-taking subcircuits of the genome. For each such island, cut o from influence by other islands by the frozen red structure, has its own alternative attractors, two for this island, five for that island, seven for a third island. The total number of attractors for the entire network is then x x = . And if so, cell types are a kind of combinatorial code of the choices made by the dierent islands.
And yet more: My colleague Marc Ballivet, with a minor bit of help from me, has come up with a means to rapidly clone most or all cis sites from cells. If the thousands of cis sites can be cloned, each can be used to anity purify the trans factors binding it. Other biologists are learning how to construct small genetic circuits. By our means or others, the medicine of the twenty-first century will learn to control the activities of genes in genetic networks, hence, control tissue regeneration and dierentiation. We enter the “postgenomic” era.
I return to my candidate law and remark next that cells typically do not live alone; they live in communities of single-celled organisms or other simple multicellular organisms, or they live in tissues in highly complex multicellular organisms. Thus, any candidate law must be considered with respect to a community of autonomous agents.
Consider an ecosystem with dierent species of bacteria. Each species may secrete dierent chemical species, S, that impinge on a subset, C, of the other cell species. In Figure . I show a three-dimensional coordinate system. One axis shows the order-chaos axis for a single isolated bacterium, measured by Derrida curve criteria, with order on the left, near the origin, and chaos on the right. The remaining axes show C and S.
If a given cell is at the phase transition between order and chaos, and additional molecular inputs, S per cell, come from C dierent types of cells, the total connectivity in the cell is raised from KN to KN + CS. The results will typically drive that cell into the chaotic regime. Indeed, the entire community will be driven into the chaotic regime.
Hence, in the coordinate system of Figure ., Igor Yakushin at Bios Group has shown that a hyperbolic surface, as shown, separates the ordered regime from the chaotic regime. Cells can buer themselves from chemical perturbations from other species by retreating deeper into the ordered regime. This can be accomplished by increasing the number of canalyzing inputs per gene. And indeed, as described above, individual eukaryotic cells do appear to lie well within the ordered regime, perhaps as buering for the fact that such cells, like yeast, live in microbial communities or, like human cells, live in tissues where each cell is bombarded with chemical signals from other cells in the same body.
It is a plausible conjecture that communities of cells, and tissues, come to lie on the phase transition surface between order and chaos. The hypothesis is readily tested. If so, perturbations of a single gene in one type of cell should trigger a power law distribution of avalanches of changes of gene activities that spreads from the perturbed gene to other genes in that cell and species, and to cells of other species. Further, the Derrida curve of the total community should be at the phase transition.
A final numerical test is under way. The aim of the numerical test is to check whether cells and communities that lie at the phase transition would, in fact, make the maximum number of reliable discriminations and act without trembling hands.
Cells that are yammering at one another probably never reach their attractors. Pick a subset, M, of the states in each cell in the community as its “action” states. Now release the community, numerically, somewhere on the edge-of-chaos surface. Over a long period of time, the M action states will be encountered in some order, yielding some probability distribution of transitions between pairs of the M states, as each cell is perturbed by S chemical signals from C other cell types. The transitions among the M action states of each cell can be written in a matrix showing the transition probabilities between any pair of the M states. From this it is possible to calculate the mutual information, MI, between pairs of the M action states.
MI is H(A) + H(B) - H(AB). Here H(A) is the entropy of A, H(B) the entropy of B, and H (AB) is the joint entropy of A and B. If A and B are occurring randomly with respect to one another, then H(AB) equals the sum of H(A) + H(B), so MI is . If either A or B is unchanging, MI is again . But if A and B are changing in correlated ways, MI is positive. Hence, we can ask what value of M maximizes the mutual information among the M states, how is that related to cell and community position on the edge-of-chaos phase transition in Figure ., and how well does the mutual information among the M action states correlate with the mutual information in the patterns of CS input signals arriving at each cell type? More broadly, can selection maximize both M and that mutual information correlation and, if so, for what value of M and where on or o the phase transition surface in Figure .?
I do not know the answers but hope the optimal point lies on the phase transition surface, for such selected mutual information correlation would begin to show that such communities of cells with such regulatory networks can indeed make the maximum number of reliable discriminations and act on them without trembling hands to make a complex living in a complex world.
Candidate Law 2: Community Assembly Reaches a Self-Organized Critical State
First, a foray into self-organized criticality, a concept that will drive the rest of this chapter.
Per Bak and his colleagues in published a paper concerned with sand piles. One is to take a large, flat table, supply lots of sand, and gently let sand fall from on high onto the table. As the sand piles up, it eventually reaches the rest angle for sand and also extends to the boundaries of the table. You keep adding sand slowly. Sand-slide avalanches begin to form and sand drops to the floor. Measure the size distribution of the avalanches and a power law distribution is revealed, with many small avalanches and few large avalanches (Figure .).
Power law distributions can, in fact, arise in many ways. One of those ways is at a phase transition, for example, in a ferromagnet at the phase transition temperature. Above the phase transition temperature, the magnetic spins line up randomly with one another and keep flipping. Below the phase transition temperature, the ferromagnet tends to line up with magnetic spins all pointing the same way, say, north pole upward, hence, the material is magnetized. At the phase transition temperature, something magic and “universal” occur: clusters of spins oriented the same way arise, and the clusters have a power law distribution of sizes. The power law distribution implies that there is no preferred size scale in the system. If there were a preferred size scale, clusters would be distributed exponentially in size, setting a size scale at which clusters at that size were half as likely as tiny clusters of spins.
So too for the sand pile. There is no preferred size scale revealed by the power law distribution of sand slide avalanche sizes. The big dierence is that clever physicists tuned the temperature of the ferromagnet to the critical phase transition temperature. Per and company tuned nothing, they merely let sand drop randomly and gently onto the sand pile, and the sand pile tuned itself to criticality, hence the name: self-organized criticality.
Many of us have fallen in love with these results. Many are critical as well. I am on the pro side of the debate. I know the theory does not apply to real sand, with its rough edges, and works well with short-grain Swedish rice, but I love it anyway. Newton’s law of universal gravitation does not work for bits of paper and cannon balls falling from the Tower of Pisa  wind resistance, you see. The bits of paper do not hit the ground at the same time as do the cannon balls. Most theories have ceterus paribus clauses. But I suspect Per and friends have found a deep truth about how nonequilibrium systems self-organize.
The remaining three of the four candidate laws apply versions of this idea. Even law above is a version. Selection tunes communities of cells to the phase transition between order and chaos where a power law distribution of damage avalanches on all scales propagate across the system.
The claims coming next are not my own work, but derive from fine eorts by ecologists Stuart Pimm, Mack Post, and more recently, Bruce Sawhill and Tim Keitt, making use of work by physicist Scott Kirkpatrick and his colleagues.
First, the early work of Stuart Pimm and Mack Post, done in the late s: They were concerned with community assembly of organisms into a local ecosystem (Figure .). They ignored long-term coevolution and made use of the Lotka-Volterra equations. These equations basically say, for any species, what other species it eats, how readily it turns the eaten prey into an extra copy of itself, and how fast it reproduces on its own without eating. Plants, herbivores, and carnivores are readily represented.
Stuart and Mack did a surprising study with an astonishing and still poorly understood result. They made a pile of hypothetical critters in a computer, each governed by some plausible Lotka-Volterra equation whose parameters were drawn at random from some distribution. Then, with fond hopes, Stuart and Mack randomly chose species, one after another and tossed them into the computational equivalent of east Kansas. (“Kansas is a place for people who like subtlety,” my friend Wes Jackson once told a group of us visiting his Land Institute in Kansas in January. We observed subtly dierent shades of brown grass, trees, dirt, dust, hawks, mice, and agreed.)
What Stuart and Mack found was this: When the first few species were tossed into east Kansas in silico, they tested whether these few could coexist by running the corresponding Lotka-Volterra equations of all the species simultaneously to see if the hypothetical species all sustained abundances above zero. For example, the model community might go to a steady-state ratio of four species or might enter a limit cycle oscillation or some chaotic dynamics with a strange attractor that remains above zero for all species.
Dandy, the mock community was stable. They kept adding randomly chosen species. At first, it was easy to add new species, but it became progressively harder until no more species could be added. The deep mystery is, why? It is not a lack of food or energy. Furthermore, on the way to assembling the community, Stuart and Mack began to notice that as the community filled up, addition of one species could make one or more other species go locally extinct. They began to find evidence of power law distributions of such extinction events.
Why? No one knows for sure, and Stuart has some wonderful ideas discussed in his fine book, The Balance of Nature. But I am going to move on to the recent ideas of Bruce Sawhill and Tim Keitt, which build on the work of physicist Scott Kirkpatrick. Scott is famous for coinventing the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick spin-glass model and hangs out at IBM being smart. Not long ago, he took up what is called the “Ksat” problem.
Here is the Ksat problem. Consider some logical formula, or expression, as in our Boolean net. Any Boolean expression can be cast in “normal disjunctive form”; an example is (A or A) and (A or A) and (not A or not A). In such an expression the variables between brackets constitute a “clause,” so this logical expression has three clauses. The clauses are linked by “and.” Thus, for the entire statement to be true, all three clauses must be true. Within each clause, variables are linked by the logical “or,” symbolized with v. (A v A) is true if A is true, if A is true, or if both A and A are true.
Now we can ask if the above expression can be satisfied by some assignment of true or false, or , to the four variables, A, A, A, and A. The answer is yes since if A = true and A = true and A = false, then all clauses are satisfied. On the other hand, consider (A) and (not A). There is no assignment of true or false to A that makes both clauses true since they contradict one another. More generally, an expression in normal disjunctive form, with K variables (A v A v   .   .   .    Ak) in each clause, a total of C clauses and a total of V variables A, A,   .   .   .    Av may or may not be satisfiable.
The wonderful result that Scott and friends showed is a phase transition from Ksat expressions that are almost certainly satisfiable to Ksat expressions that are almost certainly not satisfiable (Figure .).
In Figure ., the horizontal axis is labeled C/V. Thus, the x-axis shows the ratio of clauses to variables, hence, on average, how many clauses each variable is in. Obviously, as each variable is in more and more of the C clauses, with randomly assigned truth requirements, Vi versus not-Vi, the chance that the set of clauses can be jointly satisfied gets harder. On the other hand, as K goes up, there are more variables per clause, any one of which, if satisfied, satisfies the clause since the variables within a clause are joined by “or.” Thus, as K goes up, the problem gets easier.
Remarkably, there is a phase transition on the C/V axis at ln x (K) or . x K. As shown in Figure ., for C/V values less than this phase transition value, the expression is almost certainly satisfiable. As C/V passes the . x K critical value, the probability that the expression can be satisfied plunges to near zero.
Now, the idea that Bruce and Tim had was that building a community with random critters having random food and niche requirements is like the Ksat problem. They consider S species. Each species’ niche includes some of the S species that it eats and some that eat or kill it. Thus, species S must eat S or S or S to survive, but can survive on its own only in the absence of S, which poisons the chloroplasts that allow S to be an autotroph. In disjunctive form, the requirements for species S to survive are (S v S v S) and (not S).
Bruce and Tim did numerical experiments for dierent values of S and K and C where again K is the number of alternative species any given species could eat. (S v S v S) corresponds to K = .They found the same phase transition. As more and more species are added, there are more potential interactions among the species since the pairwise possibilities increase as the square of the total species diversity. As this occurs, each species appears in an increasing number of clauses, so as C/V increases, at some point the satisfiability of the Ksat system went from easy to hard. It became hard, then impossible, to add new species. The community filled up because the Ksat problem went from easy to impossible.
I find this line of thinking rather interesting. Given rather general assumptions on the probability per pair of species of who eats or kills what, assigned more or less randomly, then as the number of species, hence pairs of species increase, such communities can fill up in the presence of persistent attempts at invasion. Bruce and Tim may have found the underlying reason for Stuart and Mack’s earlier results. Moreover, Bruce and Tim have found reasonable numerical evidence for small and large avalanches of local extinction events upon entry of new species while the community was filling up.
Meanwhile, experimental work assembling communities of real organisms shows much the same results. Communities tend to fill up and do exhibit small and large local extinction events.
Candidate Law 3: Coevolutionary Tuning of Fitness Landscapes and Organisms to a Self-Organized Critical State
Begin with a well-stated claim of Darwin: gradualism. Species evolve, argued Darwin, by the gradual accumulation of useful variations that were gradually sifted by natural selection.
Darwin is correct about contemporary life, and presumably about ancient life, based on the record. In fact, for current life forms, seven decades of hard work by geneticists, working with organisms as disparate as mouse, fruit fly, maize, yeast, and many other eukaryotes, demonstrates conclusively that most mutations are of minor eect. For example, the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, upon which I worked for twelve years, has the abdominal bristles alluded to above. A modest number of mutants exist that slightly increase or slightly decrease the number of abdominal bristles. The flies don’t seem to mind, at least in the odd security of my and other biologists’ laboratories.
More rarely, there are mutants of rather dramatic eect, none more so than the famous homeotic mutants of Drosophila, which fascinated me and many others. Here a single mutant can change an antenna into a leg or an eye to a wing or a head to the genitalia. These survive perfectly well in the laboratory as well, but one expects would not fare well in the real world.
Therefore, most of the heritable variation cast up by mutation is of minor eect, and gradual variation is persistent grist for the selection mill. Somehow, current organisms have contrived themselves to be such that most mutations are of minor eect. But is it necessarily the case that all complex systems have the property that most mutations are of minor eect? And if not, where does the gradualism of Darwinian selection come from?
Importantly, it is easy to create systems that are not readily adaptable by mutation and selection. What follows is not quite a theorem (and was discussed in At Home in the Universe), but it will do. Many of the readers of this book are competent programmers. Consider a typical program, say written in C, Java, or some other language. Perhaps it computes something as simple as the square roots of the first two million integers. Perhaps it simulates an ecosystem. Whatever that program does, imagine trying to evolve it by making random mutations in the code.
We all know what would happen. Most mutations of a computer program are of major eect. The program won’t compile. If it compiles, it generates some vast stream of symbolic nonsense or goes into an undetected infinite loop and “hangs.”
And we can make the matter substantially worse by eliminating redundancy in the code. Any computer program can be written as a sequence of binary, and , symbols, where that sequence represents the input data to the program and the program itself.
Now, a well-known area of computer science considers how redundant a program is; for example, a simple redundancy would duplicate each binary symbol. Computer scientists talk of eliminating the redundancy of a computer code to achieve the most compressed possible code. A fascinating theorem states that there is no proof that a given computer program is maximally compressed, but that if it is maximally compressed, it is in a rigorous sense not detectably dierent from a random sequence of binary digits.
Figure . shows a four-dimensional Boolean hypercube with all two to the fourth, or sixteen, possible binary sequences of length four, ranging from () to (). Each sequence is on one of the sixteen vertices of the hypercube and connected to four -mutant neighbors achieved by changing a single binary symbol among the four from to or from to . Imagine that the minimal program we were considering were a -long binary sequence. Then that minimal program could be represented as a single vertex on the -dimensional Boolean hypercube with to the th = to the th dierent sequences, hence vertices. A remarkable theorem due to Gregory Chaiten shows that if there is a minimal program with binary symbols, there is at most about one such minimal -bit symbol sequences. In short, only a single vertex on the -dimensional Boolean hypercube corresponds to the desired minimal program. Now consider each of the other -bit sequences on the hypercube as a computer program. (Consider a gedankenexperiment, a thought experiment, for I have not carried out the actual computer experiment, and no one has been able to prove my following plausible, probably true, conjecture.) Run each binary sequence as the input data and program on our universal computer. Measure in some sense how far away the printout of that program is from the correct program for some finite chunk of the correct program’s printout. If one started with the correct program, my bet is that since all redundancy has been removed, any single mutation to the code will randomize what the code does. Distant -bit binary strings will, on average, be as good or bad an approximation of the correct program as its -mutant variants.
If one thinks of the measure of how close the output of a binary string program is to the correct program as the “fitness” of that trial binary string, then the fitness can be thought of as a height. The distribution of heights over the -dimensional Boolean hypercube therefore creates a fitness landscape. In fact, my conjecture amounts to stating that the resulting fitness landscape is completely random. Neighboring points have fitnesses that have no correlation.
Assume my conjecture is true. There are theorems stating that there is no way to hill climb to the global peak, the single correct program, by accumulating mutants that gradually improve the program. Indeed, the only way to find the single good program is, eectively, to search the entire -dimensional Boolean hypercube. You’d have to look at most of the vertices on that cube to find the working program. The problem is, as they say, NP hard, meaning the size of the problem scales exponentially in the length of the binary symbol sequence. But a single example makes a general point: Not all complex systems can be assembled by an evolutionary process!
It follows that only some complex systems can be assembled by an evolutionary process. And it turns out that an evolutionary process based on mutation, recombination, and selection, the genetic search mechanisms of current life, does very well on a special kind of fitness landscape, where the high peaks tend to cluster near one another and the sides of the peaks are reasonably smooth, rather like the high Alps.
Then, as I first asked in chapter , where do such correlated fitness landscapes come from? More generally, I recall the no-free-lunch theorem of Bill Macready and David Wolpert. Macready and Wolpert wondered whether, averaged over all possible fitness landscapes, some search algorithms, such as mutation and selection, on average outperform all other search algorithms, such as random search on the landscape or hill descending or picking birthdays, taking their square, and jumping that distance in a randomly chosen direction.
The no-free-lunch theorem proves that, averaged over all landscapes, no search algorithm outperforms any other. Well, my goodness! On average, random search and hill descending do just as well as hill climbing in finding peaks of high fitness. And here we organisms are, stuck using mutation, recombination, and selection. Yet organisms and ecosystems seem to be pretty complex. Once again, where did the “good” landscapes come from, the ones that Darwinian gradualism works so well in searching?
In chapter I was led by the above to define natural games as ways of making a living. Naturally, ways of making a living have evolved as organisms have evolved. So rather easily one gets to the conclusion that the winning games are the games that winners play.
And, as noted in chapter , those ways of making a living that set problems that are well searched out by the search mechanisms of organisms  mutation, recombination, and selection  will be well searched out. Many sibling species will arise and lineages will branch. There will be many species making livings and many cases of livings being made that are well searched out by the search mechanisms of organisms.
In short, there must be a self-consistent coconstruction of a biosphere in which organisms, ways of making a living, and search mechanisms jointly and self-consistently come into existence. Organisms are not solving arbitrary problems. We are solving the kinds of problems we can solve given our solution procedures. How could it be otherwise?
So, somehow  and we will have to seek plausible mechanisms  organisms are tuning the statistical structure of the fitness landscapes they are searching in evolution. But the problem is very much more complex than merely searching a fixed fitness landscape. Fitness landscapes are not fixed. If the abiotic environment changes, the fitness landscape of organisms changes, buckles, and deforms.
Worse, organisms coevolve. My favorite example remains the frog and the fly. If the frog develops a sticky tongue, the fitness of the fly is altered. But so too is the fitness landscape of the fly, what it should do next. It should develop slippery feet, or sticky stu dissolver or a better sense of smell to smell sticky stu before the frog gets too close or   .   .   .
So, due to coevolution, the fitness landscape of each species heaves and deforms as other species make their adaptive moves.
A Sojourn to Coevolution in the NK Model
These results were presented in At Home in the Universe but are needed here. Since they are publicly available, I will be brief.
The NK model is a simple toy world in which an organism has N genes. Each gene comes in two “alleles,” or versions, or . Each allele of each gene makes a contribution to the fitness of the organism that depends on the allele of that gene and upon the alleles of K other genes. In genetics, these K other genes are called “epistatic” inputs to the fitness contribution of a given gene. The to the N combinations of alleles of the N genes are therefore located on the vertices of the N-dimensional hypercube, like Figure.  The fitness of each type of organism, or vertex, is written on that vertex and can be thought of as a height. Hence, the NK model creates a fitness landscape over the N-dimensional Boolean hypercube. To keep matters simple, I assume all critters have a single chromosome, that is, are haploids. When they are not feeling sexy, bacteria will do as an example.
Having chosen N and K, say N = and K = , the rest is done at random in the hopes that generic features of N and K will show up in the resulting statistical structure of the fitness landscape (Figure .a–c). In one limiting case, the K inputs to each of the N genes are chosen at random from among the N. Each gene has two alleles, and . The fitness contribution of that gene is aected by which of its alleles occurs and by which of the or alleles of K other epistatic input genes occurs. Thus, each gene’s fitness contribution is aected by K + genes.
To study the generic features of such systems, I assign, once and for all, a random “fitness contribution” to each of the to the (K + ) combinations of allele states aecting each of the N genes. The fitness contribution is drawn from the uniform interval between . and.  Thus, instead of the Boolean functions described above showing when genes turn on and o, here I obtain a column vector for each of the to the (K + ) allele states aecting a given gene, and in each position is a random decimal. Once this is done for each of the N genes, it remains to define the fitness of an organism with a specific allele at each of the N genes. I define this as the average of the fitness contributions of the N genes. The results yield a fitness landscape over the N-dimensional hypercube (Figure .c).
I will briefly summarize results for the structure of NK landscapes. When K = , each of the N sites is independent. There is an optimal allele at each site and hence a globally optimal genotype. Any other genotype is suboptimal, but can steadily climb to the peak by flipping any gene in a less favorable allele to the opposite, more favorable state, or . So the landscape is like Fujiyama, single peaked with smooth sides.
When K is the maximum value, N - , as in Figure .a–c, then each gene influences the fitness contribution of every gene. This is the totally interconnected system. Since fitness values are assigned at random for the to the (K + ), or to the N input configurations when K = N - , it is easy to show that the resulting fitness landscape is fully random.
A main feature of random landscapes is that there are nearly exponentially many local peaks, indeed the number of local peaks is to N/(N + ). For N = , there are local peaks on the landscape. Finding the global peak by hill climbing is improbable, and the system becomes trapped on a local peak. Other features include the lengths of walks via fitter neighbors to nearby peaks, which scales as the logarithm of N, and the way directions uphill dwindle on walks uphill. At each step uphill, the fraction of directions uphill is cut in half, yielding exponential slowing in the rate of finding fitter variants, hence, rather general laws about the rate of improvement slowing exponentially that we will discuss in the next chapter on “learning curves” in economics.
Now, on to coevolution and the evolution of the structure of fitness landscapes. Figure . shows a frog and fly, each characterized by an NK landscape, coupled together. Each of the N genes in the frog receives inputs from K genes in the frog and C genes in the fly, and vice versa. Thus, the sticky tongue of the frog aects the fitness of the fly via the presence or absence in the fly of slippery feet, sticky stu dissolver, or a strong sense of smell for sticky frog tongues. To accommodate the C couplings, each gene in the frog looks at K + C inputs and has its table of random fitness contributions augmented with new random decimals. So too for the fly feeling the eects of the frog.
Now, when the frog population moves by mutation and selection uphill on the frog landscape, those moves distort the fly’s landscape, and vice versa. Coevolution is a game of coupled deforming landscapes. Figure .a–c show coevolution in model ecosystems with four, eight, and sixteen species. Due to landscape deformations as species coevolve, an adaptive move by one species can cause the fitness of other species to decrease. In general, such coevolving systems can behave in two regimes, an ordered regime and a chaotic regime, separated by a phase transition.
In Figure .a the four-species ecosystem eventually settles down to a state where fitnesses stop changing. This corresponds to an ordered regime or unchanging evolutionary stable state in which each species has evolved to a local peak on its fitness landscape that is consistent with the peaks occupied by its ecosystem neighbors. Once attained, each species is better o not changing so long as its neighbors do not change. By contrast, in the eight- and sixteen-species ecosystems, Figures .b and c, fitnesses continue to jostle up and down as species evolve in a chaotic regime, each species chasing the adaptive peaks on its landscape that retreat  due to adaptive moves of other species  faster than each species can attain the peaks on its own landscape.
A major point of the coevolving NK landscape model is that the creatures can tune the structure of their fitness landscapes, each for its own selfish advantage. Yet, as if by an invisible hand, the tuned landscape structure works for the average benefit of all. This toy model is, to date, the only example I know in which creatures tune the structure of their fitness landscapes such that all evolve in problem spaces where, in some sense, they can search those spaces well self-consistently with their search mechanisms.
Here is how the toy model works. Each species is represented by a single individual. Hence, the species is assumed to be isogenic, except during the rapid evolution to fitter genotypes that happens as a fitter mutant of a species steps from one point to another point on the landscape. Very rapidly, it outreproduces its less-fit cousins. Hence, in this limit, the entire species can be said to hop between points on the landscape.
At each move of the computer program, any of four events may happen. A given species is chosen at random. First, it may do nothing. Second, it may change its genotype, and if the result is that it is fitter in interacting with its ecosystem neighbors, that innovation will be accepted. The creature has evolved on its landscape and probably deformed the landscapes of its neighbors. Third, the critter can change the ruggedness of its landscape by increasing K or decreasing K. Landscapes become more rugged and multipeaked as K increases. The move altering K is accepted only if that move makes the current genotype of the creature fitter. Hence, altering the ruggedness of the fitness landscape must pay o for the creature immediately and is accepted selfishly. The fourth thing that can happen is rather mean. A random other creature, say, Godzilla, is chosen to attempt to invade the current species niche. A copy of Godzilla, Godzilla’, connects to the first species’ ecosystem neighbors and has a go. If Godzilla’ is fitter when coupled to the first species’ econeighbors than that species, that species goes extinct in its niche and is replaced by Godzilla’.
By the fourth mechanism, if Godzilla’ happens to have a beneficial landscape ruggedness due to its K value, that good landscape ruggedness has now replicated from the initial Godzilla to its copy. So good landscape ruggedness can spread, by natural selection, through the model ecosystem, hence, landscape ruggedness can evolve.
The results are shown in Figure.  Indeed, landscape ruggedness does evolve to an intermediate ruggedness. During this evolution, the mean interval between extinction events increases dramatically, hence, the mean number of extinction events decreases. In this sense, all the creatures that remain become fitter due to the coevolutionary tuning of landscape ruggedness. In addition, when Godzilla’ replaces the hapless species that now goes extinct, its econeighbors find themselves interacting with Godzilla’ itself. They may not be as fit interacting with Godzilla’ as with the first species, hence, they too may be invaded and driven extinct in turn.
In short, avalanches of extinction events can propagate. Figure . shows that the distribution is a power law, with many small and few large extinction events. Moreover, once a new species comes into existence, say, Godzilla’, it may not fare well in its new niche, hence, may go extinct soon. But if it lasts in its niche, it may be well adapted, hence, resistant to being driven extinct. The results (Figure .a) are a power law distribution of species lifetimes.
Thus, this model shows an invisible hand in which natural selection, acting on individuals only, tunes landscape ruggedness. All players are, on average, fitter in the sense of surviving as species for much longer periods, yet the ecosystem appears self-organized critical with a power law distribution of extinction events. Species lifetime distributions are also power laws.
Does this model apply to the real world? There is now considerable evidence that over the past million years the size distribution of extinction events in the record, in terms of the number of species going extinct per -million-year period, is best understood as a power law, with many small and few large extinction events, (Figure .). Furthermore, the lifetime distribution of species, as well as genera and families, is, indeed, a power law (Figure .a,b).
I have discussed my own model primarily to focus on the fact that coevolution by self-natural selection alone acting on individuals alone can tune landscape ruggedness so those landscapes are self-consistently well searched by the creatures searching them and their search mechanisms. We can, and presumably do, self-consistently coconstruct ourselves, our niches (and hence problem spaces), and our search mechanisms such that, on average, we propagate ourselves and our descendants. It has worked for . billion years. Were our fitness landscapes such that we could not search them, we would not be here. We coconstruct our ways of making a living and search out better ways of making a living while we jiggle one another.
The NK model is but one crude model of coevolving organisms and their coupled deforming landscapes. More generally, each organism has traits that are aected by many genes, the polygeny discussed above, and each gene aects many traits, the pleiotropy alluded to above. It is interesting to note that were organisms to evolve to a position below but near the biological reality that is the proper analogue of the Ksat phase transition, such a location might well achieve the gradualism and capacity to persistently evolve that Darwin noted and that we observe. Both the gradualism and capacity to evolve are related to the number of alternative assignments of true or false to the V variables that satisfy the Ksat normal disjunctive form. If there are connected pathways from one such assignment via -Hamming-mutant neighboring assignments that all satisfy the normal disjunctive form, then adaptive walks via alternatives genotypes are available, all of which roughly generate the same organism. Gradualism is achieved. Polygeny and pleiotropy tune landscape ruggedness and deformability, which tune coevolutionary dynamics, perhaps to a self-organized critical state of an ecosystem.
There are, in short, dimly understood laws that allow the coevolutionary construction of accumulating complexity. And it appears that such coevolution typically is self-organized critical. The NK coevolutionary model is not the only example of a model exhibiting self-organized critical behavior of model ecosystems. Bak and colleagues, Ricard Solé, and others have created elegant models aiming in the same direction. In particular, Solé’s model comes closest to fitting the actual slopes of the observed power laws, which are -.
Candidate Law 4: Expanding the Adjacent Possible in a Self-Organized Critical Way
How does the biosphere, collectively, broach and persistently invade the adjacent possible at the chemical, morphological, and behavioral levels?
I suspect there is a general law and mentioned it in the last section of the previous chapter. It is my hoped-for fourth law of thermodynamics for self-constructing biospheres. We enter the adjacent possible, hence expand the workspace of our biosphere, on average, as fast as we can.
Recall the Noah’s Vessel experiment, with two of every species ground up in a blender, breaking all cell membranes, comingling the trillion or so proteins of the hundred million species with the thousands of small molecule metabolites. A supracritical explosion of chemical diversity would presumably ensue. As I noted, life has learned to avoid that fate. Cells are subcritical. Were they not, then any new chemical that chanced to enter the cells of Fredricka the fern would unleash a cascade of synthesis of novel molecular species, some of which would presumably kill poor Fredricka. Best defense? Stay subcritical. Why mess with that mess?
But recall that a mixed microbial community should be able to be driven to the subcritical-supracritical boundary by increasing the diversity of microbial species present and/or hitting the community with a sucient diversity of novel small molecule species. My argument follows that if the community is supracritical, the novel cascading molecular species will kill o some of the microbial species, thereby lowering the community toward the subcritical regime. On the other hand, mutation and immigration should drive the community toward the supracritical regime. Do mixed microbial communities hover on the subcritical-supracritical boundary? We have seen other reasons that bound a community’s complexity, including Ksat problems noted in this chapter. So a better question is: Can microbial communities be driven supracritical? And if so, are they often near that boundary?
Of course, I do not know, but the hypothesis is testable. Increase the diversity of species and test for the diversity of synthesized small molecules, say, by gas chromatography. A colleague and I once devised such an experiment with mixtures of increasingly diverse moss species, planning to measure the molecular diversity of gas species evolved as a function of community diversity and the diversity in gas species introduced to the community. We went skiing instead. I still like the lines of the experiment. It could be carried out directly with mixed microbial communities as well.
As noted in the previous chapter, there must be some interplay in the entry into the adjacent possible that gates the exploration by the capacity of natural selection to trim away the losers. I described the Manfred Eigen–Peter Schuster error catastrophe. If the mutation rate in a population of viruses is low, by successive rare successful mutations the population climbs steadily uphill, then becomes trapped on or in the near vicinity of a local peak.
But let the mutation rate be increased. The population on the peak is deformed by the rapid accumulation of mutations and diuses away from the peak into the lowlands of poor fitness. Tuning the mutation rate compared to the selection advantage of the fitness peak compared to nearby values on the fitness landscape tunes this error catastrophe. Above a critical ratio of the selective advantage at the peak to the mutation rate, the population remains near the peak. If the mutation rate is slightly higher, the population diuses into the high-dimensional hinterlands, lost adrift in sequence space.
The error catastrophe is, of course, rather general. Eigen and Schuster consider a fixed high-dimensional sequence space, like our N-dimensional Boolean hypercube, which can be regarded as a sequence space in which molecules have only two “nucleotides” and , C and G.
But what about an ever enlarging space of possibilities, expanding into an ever larger adjacent possible? Here too the rate of exploration of novel possibilities must be gradual enough that natural selection can weed out the losers. If not, the biosphere as a whole would diuse into new ways of making a living so rapidly that selection would not be able to control the exploration, and we would soon falter.
So a general balance must be struck. We broach the adjacent possible by those exaptations that are not, I hold, finitely describable beforehand and do so at a rate that manages to work. We gate our entry into the adjacent possible.
Globally, for the entire biosphere, this suggests that we enter the adjacent possible about as fast as we can get away with it. On average, the global diversity of the biosphere has increased secularly. Indeed, it would be fascinating to know what has happened to microbial diversity in . billion years. There are bacteria eating rocks down there two miles below the surface, in hot thermal vents, in the cold of Antarctic frozen tundra and lake edges, all over the place.
I do not know the form of the law that governs this exploration. Perhaps it is locally self-organized critical in communities, multiplied by the number of eectively independent local communities in the biosphere. But I can make out a law in which the adjacent possible is invaded, such that diversity and coconstructed, coevolved complexity accumulate, on average, as fast as it can.
I can sense a fourth law of thermodynamics for self-constructing systems of autonomous agents. Biospheres enlarge their workspace, the diversity of what can happen next, the actual and adjacent possible, on average, as fast as they can. Clues include the fact, noted above, that for the adjacent possible of a N-dimensional phase space to increase as the biosphere’s trajectory travels among microstates, a secular increase in the symmetry splittings of microstate volumes must occur, such that dierent subvolumes go to dierent adjacent possible microstates. Eventually, such subvolumes hit the Heisenberg uncertainty limit. As I noted, organisms do touch that limit all over the place in the subtle distinctions that we make, turning genes on and o, smell sensors on and o, and eyes on and o, this way and that.
The whole of this chapter suggests that autonomous agents coevolve to be as capable as possible of making the most diverse discriminations and actions, take advantage of the most unexpected exaptations, coevolve as readily as possible to coconstruct the blossoming diversity that is, and remains, Darwin’s “tangled bank.” I sense a fourth law in which the workspace of the biosphere expands, on average, as fast as it can in this coconstructing biosphere.
A fourth law for any biosphere? I hope so.





Chapter 9
The Persistently Innovative Econosphere
t is no accident that the words for economics and ecology have the same Greek root, “house.” Ecology and economics are, at root, the same. The economy of Homo habilis and Homo erectus, the stunning flaked flint tools of the Magdalinian culture of the magnificent Cro-Magnon in southern France , years ago when the large beasts had retreated southward from the glaciation, the invention and spread of writing in Mesopotamia, the Greek agora, and today’s global economy are all in the deepest sense merely the carrying on of the more diversified forms of trade that had their origins with the first autonomous agents and their communities over four billion years ago.
Economics has its roots in agency and the emergence of advantages of trade among autonomous agents. The advantages of trade predate the human economy by essentially the entire history of life on this planet. Advantages of trade are found in the metabolic exchange of legume root nodule and fungi, sugar for fixed nitrogen carried in amino acids. Advantages of trade were found among the mixed microbial and algal communities along the littoral of the earth’s oceans four billion years ago. The trading of the econosphere is an outgrowth of the trading of the biosphere.
Economics has considered itself the science of allocation of scarce resources. In doing so, it shortchanges its proper domain. Indeed, if we stand back and squint, it is easy to see the most awesome feature of an economy and its roots in autonomous agents: The most awesome feature of the econosphere, as of the biosphere  both built by communities of autonomous agents in their urgent plunging, lunging, sliding, gliding, hiding, trading, and providing  has been a blossoming diversity of molecular and organismic species and of novel ways of making a living that has persistently burgeoned into the adjacent possible. From tens of organic molecular species to tens of trillions; from one or a few species of autonomous agents to a standing diversity of some hundred million species and a total diversity some hundred to thousandfold larger of those creatures come and gone.
Homo erectus had fire and early tools. Homo habilis traded stone axe parts . million years ago. The diversity of Cro-Magnon goods and services in the south of France some , years ago may have numbered in the several hundreds to a few thousands. Today, surf the web and count the diversity of goods and services, the ways of making a living; it is in the millions.
Neither the biosphere nor the econosphere are merely about the distribution of limited resources, both are expressions of the immense creativity of the universe, and in particular, of autonomous agents as we exapt molecularly, morphologically, and technologically in untold, unforetellable ways persistently into the adjacent possible. Jobs and job holders jointly coevolve into existence in the econosphere in an ever-expanding web of diverse complexity.
One of the most striking facts about current economic theory is that it has no account of this persistent secular explosion of diversity of goods, services, and ways of making a living. Strange, is it not, that we have no theory of these overwhelming facts of the biosphere and econosphere? Strange, is it not, that we pay no attention to one of the most profound features of the world right smack in front of our collective nose? And consistent with this strangeness, the most comprehensive theory, the rock foundation of modern economics, the beautiful “competitive general equilibrium” theory of Arrow and Debreu, does not and cannot discuss this explosion, perhaps the most important feature of the economy.
General Competitive Equilibrium and Its Limitations
So we begin with an outline of competitive general equilibrium as the cornerstone conceptual framework of modern economics. Ken Arrow is a friend. As one of the inventors of the framework, Ken is more at liberty to be a critic than the two generations of economists who have followed in his footsteps. My best reading of Ken’s view, which I share, is that competitive general equilibrium is, at present, the only overarching framework we have to think about the economy as a whole. Yet Ken suspects that that framework is incomplete; I agree.
Competitive general equilibrium grows out of a conceptual framework in which the core question is how prices form such that markets clear. Recall the famous supply-and-demand curves for a single good (Figure .). As a function of increasing price, plotted on the x-axis, supply, plotted on the y-axis, increases from low to high. More companies are willing to create widgets as the price per widget increases. On the other hand, demand, where demand is also plotted on the y-axis, decreases from high to low as prices increase. Fewer customers are willing to buy widgets as the price per widget increases.
As the figure shows, the supply-and-demand curves cross at some price. At that price, the markets “clear,” that is, all the widgets supplied are purchased. The price at which markets clear is the “equilibrium price.”
For a single good, the problem is simple. But consider bread and butter. Since many of us like butter on our bread, the demand for butter depends not only on the price and hence the supply of butter, but also on the price of bread, hence on the supply of bread. And vice versa, the demand for bread depends upon the price of butter and hence on the supply of butter. For thousands of goods, where the demand for any one good depends upon the price of many goods and the supply of any one good depends upon the price of many goods, it is not so obvious that there is a price for each good such that all markets clear.
But worse, the supply or demand for bread today may be dierent than the supply or demand for bread tomorrow. And still worse, the supply or demand for bread tomorrow may depend on all sorts of odd contingent facts. For example, if severe cold kills the winter wheat next month, the supply of bread will drop; if a bumper crop of winter wheat comes available globally because of weather or suddenly improved irrigation and farming practices worldwide, the supply will go up.
Arrow and Debreu made brilliant steps. First, they consider a space of all possible dated and contingent goods. One of their examples of a “dated contingent good” is “ ton of wheat delivered in Chicago on May , , under the condition that the average rainfall in Nebraska for the six preceding months has been percent less than normal for the past fifty years and that the Boston Red Sox won the World Series the previous year.”
In the Arrow-Debreu theory, we are to imagine an auctioneer, who at a defined beginning of time, say, this morning, holds an auction covering all possible dated contingent goods. All suppliers and customers gather at this imaginary auction, bidding ensues for all possible dated contingent goods, with values calculated under dierent hypotheses about the probabilities that the dierent dated contingencies will come about. At the end of an imaginary hour of frantic bargaining, the auction closes. All participants now have contracts to buy or sell all possible dated contingent goods, each at a fixed price. Everybody hustles home to watch Good Morning America. And, wondrously, however the future unfolds, whether there’s rain, sun, or snow in Nebraska, the dated contingent contracts that are appropriate come due, the contracts are fulfilled at the preestablished price for each contract, and all markets clear.
It is mind-boggling that Arrow and Debreu proved these results. The core means of the solution depends upon what mathematicians call “fixed-point theorems.” A beginning case is your hair, particularly for males, where short hair makes the fixed point easy to see. When you comb your hair in a normal fashion, there is a point roughly on top of your head, slightly to the back, where a roughly circular swirl of hair occurs (ignoring baldness) around a fixed point where typically a bit of scalp shows through.
A general theorem considers hair on a spherical surface and combing the hair in any way you want. You cannot avoid a fixed point. More generally, replace hair by arrows, with tails and heads, where each arrow is a line with an arrow head at one end, drawn on the surface of the sphere. The arrows may bend if you like. Each arrow can be thought of as mapping the point on the sphere at the tail of that arrow to the point of the sphere at the tip of that arrow. So the arrows are a mapping of the surface of the sphere onto itself. For a continuous mapping, such that there is a mapping from each point on the sphere, a general fixed-point theorem proves that there must be at least one point on the surface of the sphere that maps onto itself  that point is a fixed point under the arrow mapping.
The wonderful Arrow-Debreu general competitive equilibrium theorems depend on such a fixed point. In a space where all possible dated contingent goods can be prestated and all possible markets for trade of all such goods exist, a fixed point also exists that corresponds to a price at which all such markets clear, however the future unfolds. Arrow and Debreu won the Nobel Prize for their work, and won it deservedly. It is a beautiful theory. Yet there are important critiques of general competitive equilibrium. For example, the theorem depends on “complete markets,” that is, markets to trade all possible dated contingent goods, and fine economists have raised issues about how well the theory works if markets are incomplete, as indeed they are.
I pose, however, a wider set of issues. The overarching feature of the economy over the past million years or so is the secular increase in the diversity of goods and services, from a dozen to a dozen million or more today. Nowhere does general competitive equilibrium speak about this. Nor can the theory speak about the growth in diversity of goods and services, for it assumes at the outset that one can finitely prestate all possible dated contingent goods. Then the theory uses complete markets and a fixed-point theorem to prove that a price exists such that markets clear.
But we have seen grounds to be deeply suspicious of the claim that we can finitely prestate all possible exaptations  whether they be new organic functionalities or new goods  that arise in a biosphere or an econosphere, such as Gertrude learning to fly in her terrified leap from the pine tree million years ago last Friday or the engineers working on the tractor suddenly realizing that the engine block itself could serve as the chassis.
I do not believe for a moment that we can finitely prestate all possible goods and services. Indeed, economists intuitively know this. They distinguish between normal uncertainty and “Knightian uncertainty.” Normal uncertainty is the kind we are familiar with in probability theory concerning flipping coins. I am unsure whether in flips there will be heads and tails. Thanks to lots of work, I can now calculate the probability of any outcome in the finitely prestated space of possible outcomes.
Knightian uncertainty concerns those cases where we do not yet know the possible outcomes. Knightian uncertainty has rested in an epistemologically uncomfortable place in economics and elsewhere. Why? Because we have not realized that we cannot finitely prestate the configuration space of a biosphere or an econo-sphere; by contrast, Newton, Laplace, Boltzmann, Einstein, and perhaps Bohr have all more or less presupposed that we can finitely prestate the configuration space of any domain open to scientific enquiry. After all, as I have noted, we can and do prestate the N configuration space for a liter of N gas particles.
From this point of view, the wonderful Arrow-Debreu theory is fundamentally flawed.
Moreover, general competitive equilibrium, seen as a culmination of one central strand of economic theory, is too limited. Insofar as economics is concerned with understanding the establishment of prices at which markets clear, general competitive equilibrium was a masterpiece. But insofar as economics is or should be concerned with how and why economies increase the diversity of goods and services, the reigning theory is a nonstarter. And since the growth in wealth per capita over the past million years is deeply related to the growth in the diversity of technology and goods and services, contemporary economics is clearly inadequate.
We need a theory of the persistent coming into existence of new goods and services and extinction of old goods and services, rather like the persistent emergence of new species in an ecosystem and extinction of old species. In the previous chapter, we discussed ecosystems as self-organized critical. We discussed the bio-sphere and econosphere as advancing into the adjacent possible in self-organized critical small and large bursts of avalanches of speciation and extinction events. We discussed the power law distribution of extinction events in the biological record. And we discussed the power law distribution of lifetimes of species and genera.
But the econosphere has similar extinction and speciation events. Consider my favorite example: The introduction of the automobile drove the horse, as a mode of transport, extinct. With the horse went the barn, the buggy, the stable, the smithy, the saddlery, the Pony Express. With the car came paved roads, an oil and gas industry, motels, fast-food restaurants, and suburbia. The Austrian economist, Joseph Schumpeter, called these gales of creative destruction, where old goods die and new ones are born. One bets that Schumpeterian gales of creative destruction come in a power law distribution, with many small avalanches and few large ones. More, if species and genera have a power law distribution of lifetimes, what of firms? Firms do show a similar power law distribution of lifetimes. Most firms die young, some last a long time. We may bet that technologies show similar avalanches of speciation and extinction events and lifetime distributions.
The parallels are at least tantalizing, and probably more than that. While the mechanisms of heritable variation dier and the selection criteria dier, organisms in the biosphere and firms and individuals in the econosphere are busy trying to make a living and explore new ways of making a living. In both cases, the puzzling conditions for the evolutionary cocreation and coassembly of increasing diversity are present. The biosphere and econosphere are persistently transforming, persistently inventing, persistently dying, persistently getting on with it, and, on average, persistently diversifying. And into a framework of such a diversifying set of goods and services we must graft the central insights of general competitive equilibrium as the approximate short-timescale mechanism that achieves a rough-and-ready approximate clearing of markets at each stage of the evolution of the economy.
A rough hypothetical biological example may help understand market clearing in a more relaxed formal framework than general competitive equilibrium. Consider two bacterial species, red and blue. Suppose the red species secretes a red metabolite, at metabolic cost to itself, that aids the replication rate of the blue species. Conversely, suppose the blue species secretes a dierent blue metabolite, at metabolic cost to itself, that increases the replication rate of the red species. Then the conditions for a mutualism are possible. Roughly stated, if blue helps red more than it costs itself, and vice versa, a mixed community of blue and red bacteria may grow. How will it happen? And is there an optimal “exchange rate” of blue-secreted metabolite to red-secreted metabolite, where that exchange rate is the analogue of price?
Well, it can and does happen. Here is the gedankenexperiment: Imagine an ordered set of blue mutant bacteria that secrete dierent amounts of the blue metabolite that helps the red bacteria. Say the range of secretion is from to molecules per minute per blue bacterium, with metabolic cost to the blue bacteria proportional to the number of molecules secreted. Conversely, imagine mutant red bacteria that secrete from to of the red molecules valuable to the blue bacteria, at a similar cost proportional to the number of molecules secreted.
Now create a large, square petri plate with rows and columns drawn on the plastic below to guide your experimental hands. Arrange the rows, numbered to to correspond to blue bacteria secreting to molecules a second. Arrange the columns, numbered to to correspond to the red bacteria secreting to molecules a second. Into each of the x cells on your square petri plate, place exactly one red and one blue bacterium with the corresponding secretion rates. Thus, in the upper left, bacteria that are low blue and low red secretors are coplated onto each square. On the lower left, high blue and low red secretors are coplated. On the upper right, low blue and high red secretors are coplated. And in the lower right corner, high red and high blue bacteria are coplated.
Go for lunch, and dinner, and come back the next day. In general, among the , coplated pairs of bacteria, while all , colonies will have grown, a single pair will have grown to the largest mixed red-blue bacterial colony. Say the largest mixed red-blue colony corresponds to red secreting molecules per second, blue secreting molecules per second.
This gedankenexperiment is important, for the exchange ratio of red and blue molecules is the analogue of price, the ratio of trading of oranges for apples. And there exists a ratio, red molecules to blue molecules per second, that maximizes the growth of the mixed red-blue bacterial colony. Since the fastest growing mixed red-blue colony will exponentially outgrow all others and dominate our gedankenexperiment petri plate, this red-blue pair establishes “price” in the system at red to blue molecules. Further, in the fastest growing red-blue colony, where red secretes molecules and blue secretes molecules per second, both the red and blue bacteria in that mixed colony are replicating at the identical optimum rate. As discussed in chapter , using a rough mapping of biology to economics, that rate of replication of a bacterium corresponds to economic utility and the increased the rate of replication corresponds to increased economic utility. The red and blue bacteria not only establish price, but they also share equally the advantages of trade present along the Pareto-ecient contract curve in the Edgeworth box discussed in chapter .
Mutualists in the biosphere have been hacking out rough price equilibria for millions of years and have done so without foresight and without the Arrow-Debreu fixed-point theorems. Indeed, critters have been hacking out rough price equilibria even as exaptations and new ways of living have come into existence and old ways have perished. Presumably, these rough biological price equilibria are reached because in the short and intermediate term they optimize the fitness of both of the mutualists. And the markets clear, in the sense that all the red molecules are exchanged for blue molecules per second. But it’s a self-organized critical world out there, with small and large avalanches of speciation and extinction events in the biosphere and econosphere, and equilibrium price or no, most species and technologies, job holders and jobs, are no longer among us to mumble about advantages of trade.
I confess I am happier with this image of prices established in local, rough-and-ready ways at many points in an ecosystem or economy than with the beautiful fixed-point theorems of general competitive equilibrium. Bacteria and horseshoe crabs keep establishing rough price equilibria in their mutualisms without a prespecified space of ways of making a living. If they can do it, so can we mere humans. Getting on with it in the absence of predefined configuration spaces has been the persistent provenance of autonomous agents since we stumbled into existence.
Rational Expectations and Its Limitations
Actually, there has been a major extension of general competitive equilibrium called “rational expectations.” Like general competitive equilibrium, this theory too is beautiful but, I think, deeply flawed.
Rational expectations grew, in part, out of an attempt to understand actual trading on stock exchanges. Under general competitive equilibrium, little trading should occur and stock prices should hover in the vicinity of their fundamental value, typically understood as the discounted present value of the future revenue stream from the stock. But, in fact, abundant trading does occur, and speculative bubbles and crashes occur. Rational expectations theory is built up around another fixed-point theorem. Rational expectations theory assumes a set of economic agents with beliefs about how the economy is working. The agents base their economic actions on those beliefs. A fixed point can exist under which the actions of the agents, given their beliefs about the economy, exactly create the expected economic behavior. So, under rational expectations one can understand bubbles. It is rational to believe that prices are going above fundamental value and thus to invest, and the investments sustain the bubble for a period of time.
Meanwhile, Homo economicus has been thought to be infinitely rational. In the Arrow-Debreu setting, such infinitely rational agents bargain and achieve the best equilibrium price for each dated contingent good. In rational expectations, the agents figure out how the economy is working and behave in such a way that the expected economic system is the one that arises. The theories and actions of the agents self-consistently create an economy fitting the theories under which the agents operate.
But beautiful as these fixed-point theorems are, there are two troubles in the rational expectations framework. First, the beautiful fixed points may not be stable to minor fluctuations in agent behaviors. Under fluctuations, the economic system may progressively veer away from the fixed point into a feared conceptual no-man’s-land. Second, achieving the fixed points seems to demand excessive rationality to fit real human agents. So it appears necessary to extend rational expectations.
One direction was broached thirty years ago, when economist Herb Simon introduced the terms “satisficing,” and “bounded rationality.” Both seem sensible but have been problematic. Satisficing suggests that agents do not optimize but do well enough; yet it has been hard to make this concept pay o. It has also been hard to make advances with the concept of bounded rationality for the simple reason that there is one way, typically, of being infinitely smart and indefinitely many ways of being rather stupid. What determines the patterns of bounded stupidity? How should economic theory proceed?
Natural Rationality Is Bounded
I suspect that there may be a natural extension to rational expectations applicable to human and any strategic agents, and I report a body of work suggested by me but largely carried out by Vince Darley at Harvard for his doctoral thesis. Two virtues of our eorts are to find a natural bound to infinite rationality and a natural sense of satisficing.
The core ideas stated for human agents are these: Suppose you have a sequence of events, say, the price of corn by month, and want to predict next month’s price of corn. Suppose you have data for twenty months. Now, Fourier invented his famous decomposition, which states that any wiggly line on a blackboard can be approximated with arbitrary accuracy by a weighted sum of sine and cosine waves of dierent wavelengths and phase osets, chosen out of the infinite number of possible sine and cosine functions with all possible wavelengths.
Now, you could try to “fit” the data on the corn prices with the first Fourier “mode,” namely the average price. But presumably if the twenty prices vary a fair amount, that average will not predict the twenty-first month’s price very well. You have “underfit the data.” Or you could use twenty or more Fourier modes, all dierent wavelengths, with dierent phase osets, and you would, roughly, wind up drawing a straight line between the adjacent pairs of points in the twenty-period series. This procedure will not help too much in predicting the twenty-first period. You have “overfit” the data by using too many Fourier modes.
Typically, optimal prediction of the twenty-first period price will be achieved by using two to five Fourier modes, each of dierent wavelength and dierent phase oset. As is well known in the art, you have neither underfit nor overfit your data.
This fact suggests that the optimal prediction of a short sequence of data is obtained by a model of intermediate complexity  a few Fourier modes, neither a single one nor very many. The sense of bounded rationality Vince and I want to advocate is that optimal prediction of a limited time series is achieved with models using only a few Fourier modes, or their analogs in other basis sets  models of modest, or bounded, complexity.
The rest of the theory Vince and I have developed goes to show that agents who have theories of one another and act selfishly based on those theories will typically create a persistently changing pattern of actions. Therefore, they persistently create a nonstationary world in which only the relatively recent past has valid data. Thus, there is always only a limited amount of valid data on which to base theories, and the agents, in turn, must always build models of intermediate, bounded complexity to avoid over- or underfitting the meager valid data.
Natural rationality is, in this sense, bounded. It is bounded because we mutually create nonstationary worlds. What happens is that the agents act under their theories. But in due course some agent acts in a way that falsifies the theories of one or more other agents. These agents either are stubborn or change their theories. If they change their theories of the first agent, then typically they also change their actions. In turn, those changes disconfirm the theory of the first agent, and perhaps still other agents. So the agents wind up in a space of coevolving theories and actions with no fixed-point, stable steady states, which means that past actions are a poor guide to future actions by an agent since his theories, and hence his action plans, have changed. But this means that the agents mutually create a “nonstationary” time series of actions (nonstationary just means that the statistical characteristics of the time series keep changing because the agents keep changing their theories and actions). In turn, the agents typically have only a modest amount of relatively recent data that is still valid and reliable on which to base their next theories of one another. Given only a modest amount of valid and reliable data, the agents must avoid overfitting or underfitting that smallish amount of data, so they must use theories of intermediate complexity  for example, four Fourier modes to fit the data, not one or twenty.
Vince and I want to say that natural rationality is bounded to models of intermediate complexity because we collectively and persistently create nonstationary worlds together. In the agent-based computer models Vince has created for his thesis, just this behavior is seen. Indeed, we allow agents to evolve how much of the past history of the interactions they will pay attention to and how complex their models of one another will be  one, four, or fifty Fourier modes. Agents evolve in a history and complexity space to find currently optimal amounts of history and complexity to use to optimally predict their neighbors. In our little world, the agents evolve to use a modest history, ignoring the distant past, and only modestly complex theories of one another.
We have found evidence of a further, perhaps generic, property that appears to drive such systems to settle down, then change in a sudden burst. As the system of agents and actions settles down to some repeatable behavior, an increasingly wide range of alternative theories, simple and very complex, fit the same data. But the complex theories, with many Fourier modes, attempt to predict fine details of the repeatable behavior. As those theories become more complex, they are more fragile because they can be disconfirmed by ever more minor fluctuations in the repeatable behavior. Sooner or later such a fluctuation happens, and the agents with the complex disconfirmed theories change theories and actions radically, setting up a vast avalanche of changes of theories and actions that sweeps the system, driving the collective behavior far from any repeatable pattern. In these new circumstances, only a small subset of theories fits the current facts, so the diversity, and complexity, of theories in the population of agents plummets, and the system finds its way back to some repeatable pattern of behavior.
In short, there appears to be not only a bounded complexity in our rationality, but a fragility - stability cyclic oscillation in our joint theories and actions as well. In these terms, the system of agents and theories never settles down to a fixed-point equilibrium in which markets clear. Instead, the system repeatedly fluctuates away from the contract curve then returns to new points in the vicinity of the contract curve. Hence, in precisely the sense of repeatedly fluctuating away from a contract curve then returning to its vicinity, the system does not achieve an optimizing price equilibrium, but satisfices.
The bounded complexity issues would seem to apply to any coevolving autonomous agents that are able to make theories of one another and base actions on those theories. The tiger chasing the gazelle and the starfish predating the trilobite are, we suppose, Popperian creatures able to formulate hypotheses about their worlds that may sometimes die in their stead. Presumably all such autonomous agents, under persistent mutation and selection, would opt for changeable models of one another of bounded complexity.
While these steps are only a beginning to go beyond rational expectations in economics, they seem promising. Whatever natural, or unnatural, games autonomous agents are playing as they and we coevolve in a biosphere or econo-sphere, nonstationarity arises on many levels. Here we see it at the level of the agents’ theories of one another and the actions based on those theories. Perhaps this is just part of how the world works. Given the semantic import of yuck and yum, and the reality of natural games for fox and hare, for E. coli and paramecium, these changing theories and actions are part of the fabric of history of the market, the savannah, and the small pond.
Natural rationality is bounded by the very nonstationarity of the worlds we cocreate as we coexapt.
Technology Graphs and Economic Webs
Life takes its unexpected turns. I have been an academic scientist, a biologist, for thirty years at the University of Chicago, the National Institutes of Health, the University of Pennsylvania, then twelve stunningly exciting years at the Santa Fe Institute. After thirty years, I’ve written the canonical hundred or more scientific articles, was fortunate enough to receive a MacArthur Fellowship, during whose five years my IQ went up and then slumped back to normal as the funding ended, invented and patented this and that, and published two previous books of which I am proud, Origins of Order and At Home in the Universe, both by Oxford University Press.
I thought Origins and At Home were largely about the challenge of extending Darwinism to an account of evolution that embraced both self-organization and natural selection in some new, still poorly understood marriage. One hundred and forty years after Darwin, after all, we still have only inklings about the kinds of systems that are capable of adaptation. What principles, if any, govern the coevolutionary assembly of complex systems such as ecosystems or British common law, where a new finding by a judge alters precedent in ways that ricochet in small and large avalanches through the law? If new determinations by judges did not have any wider impact, the law could not evolve. If every new determination altered interpretation of precedents throughout the entire corpus of common law, the law also could not evolve.
My rough bet is that systems capable of coevolutionary construction, such as British common law, can evolve and accumulate complexity because they are somehow self-organized critical, and a power law distribution of avalanches of implications of new precedent ricochet in the law and in other complex coevolving systems to allow complexity to accumulate. Indeed, based on self-organized criticality, and more particularly on the analysis of the NK fitness landscape model discussed in Origins and At Home and the “patches” version of the NK model discussed in At Home, I am rather persuaded that adapting systems can best exploit the trade-o between exploitation and exploration at a rough phase transition between order and chaos. Here power law distributions of small and large avalanches of change can and do propagate through the system as it adapts.
So saying, and having published Origins and then At Home, I was rather surprised to find business people approaching me. The consulting companies of McKinsey, Coopers and Lybrand, Anderson, and Ernst and Young began visiting the Santa Fe Institute to learn about the “new sciences of complexity.” In due course, Chris Meyer at the Center for Business Innovation at Ernst and Young asked me if I might be interested in forming a fifty-fifty partnership with E and Y to discover if complexity science, that nuanced term, could be applied in the practical world. I found myself deeply intrigued. Was the work of my colleagues and myself mere theory or did it have application in real biospheres and econospheres? Why not plunge in and try my best to find out, to do it right, even knowing how early was the stage of the science we had been inventing.
Bios Group Inc., the partnership with Ernst and Young, is now just three-and-a-half years old. We have grown to over seventy people, heading, we hope, for a hundred. Our annual revenues are running at $ million. We have a hopeful eye on $ to $ million this year with clients ranging from Texas Instruments, for whom we invented a novel adaptive chip, to the U.S. Marine Corps with its concern for adaptive combat, to Unilever, the NASDAQ stock market, Honda, Boeing, Johnson and Johnson, Procter & Gamble, Kellogg, Southwest Airlines, the Joint Chiefs of Sta, and others. We have spun out a biotechnology company, CIStem Molecular, that aims to clone the small cis acting DNA regions that control turning genes on and o in development and disease; a European daughter company, Euro-Bios; as well as EXA, a company spun out with NASDAQ to make tools for financial markets. I’m deeply glad to be chairman of the board and chief scientist of Bios, to be working with a very creative group of colleagues, and to be finding routes in the practical world where our ideas do, in fact, apply.
I mention Bios and my involvement because some of the science we have done bears on diverse aspects of practical economics and even begins to suggest pathways beyond the limitations of the Arrow-Debreu theory. I begin with Boeing, which came to Bios wondering how to design and build airplanes in a year rather than seven years. Out of what modular parts and processes, wonder Boeing folks, might it be possible to assemble a family of related aircraft for a diversity of markets?
The obvious approach was to invent “Lego World.” As founding general partner and chief scientist, I duly authorized the expenditure of $. to buy a largish box of Lego parts. (In truth, I fib. I actually won the Lego box at our first Bios Christmas party.)
Most of the readers of this book will be familiar with Lego. It is a construction game consisting of snap-together, plastic parts, based on square blocks that graduate in size, for example, x , x , x , and x blocks. The blocks can be assembled into wonderfully complex structures, as many delighted children and adults have discovered.
But what might Lego World be? What, indeed. Well, consider a large pile of Lego blocks on a bare wooden table. Consider these blocks the “primitive parts.” Now consider all the primitive construction or deconstruction operations, pressing two parts together or adding a primitive part to a growing assemblage, or taking a part o another part or o an assemblage.
Consider the pile of unassembled bare Lego parts as the founder set, and place in “rank ” all the unique Lego objects that can be constructed from the founder set in a single construction step. Thus, a x can be attached in a specific overlapping way to a x . Now place in rank all the unique Lego objects that can be constructed from the founder set in two construction (or deconstruction) steps. Similarly, consider ranks , , ,   .   .   .   , , , ,, ,,,   .   .   .   .
A set of primitive parts and the transformations of those parts into other objects is a “technology graph.” In fact, a technology graph is deeply similar to a chemical-reaction bipartite graph from a founder set of organic molecules, where the molecules are the objects and the reaction hyperedges linking substrate and products are the transformations among the objects. The graph is “bipartite” because there are two types of entities, nodes, and hyperedges, representing objects and transformations.
The first thing to notice about the Lego World technology graph is that it might extend o to infinity, given an infinite number of primitive Lego parts.
The second thing to notice is that within Lego World an adjacent possible relative to any actual set of primitive and more complex Lego structures is perfectly definable. The adjacent possible is just that set of unique novel objects, not yet constructed, that can be constructed from the current set of Lego objects in a single construction step. Of course, within the limited world of Lego we can think of the technologically adjacent possible from any actual. A Lego economy might flow persistently from simple primitive objects into the adjacent possible, building up evermore complex objects.
A third feature is that we might consider specific Lego machines, made of Lego parts, each able to carry out one or more of the primitive gluing or ungluing operations. Lego World could build up the machine tools to build other objects including other tools.
Indeed, in Origins of Order and At Home in the Universe, I borrowed theoretical chemist Walter Fontana’s algorithmic chemistry and defined a mathematical analogue of Lego World, namely a “grammar model” of an economy. In that model, binary symbol strings represented goods and services, as do Lego objects in Lego World. In a grammar model, “grammar” specifies how symbol strings act on symbol strings, rather like machines on inputs, to produce new symbol strings. In Lego World, the grammar is specified by the ways primitive blocks can be attached or unattached and by any designation of which Lego objects can carry out which primitive construction operations. The grammar in question may be simple and “context-insensitive” or a far richer “context-sensitive” grammar in which what objects can be added in what ways to dierent objects depends upon the small or large context surrounding those blocks. In short, in a context-sensitive grammar, the objects and transformations rules are sensitive to the context of the objects and previous transformations themselves.
Before proceeding with current uses of Lego World and its intellectual children, notice that Lego World, like the grammar models in Origins and At Home, can become the locus of an economy, in which the sets of goods and services can expand over time and in which speciation and extinction events occur. In Origins and At Home, I built upon a suggestion of economist Paul Romer, and specified that each symbol string  or here, each Lego object  has some utility to a single consumer. The utility of each object to the consumer is subjected to exponential discounting over time. A Lego house today is worth more than a Lego house tomorrow and still more than a Lego house two days from now. And for simplicity’s sake, the total utility of a bundle of goods is the sum of their discounted utilities to the consumer.
Next, I invoked a “social planner.” The task of the social planner is to plan a pattern of production activities over time that optimizes the discounted happiness of the consumer. A standard approach is to adopt a finite planning horizon. The social planner thinks ahead, say, ten periods, finds that pattern of construction activities over time that creates the sequence of symbol-string goods, or Lego objects, that maximizes the time-discounted happiness of the consumer. Then, the social planner initiates the first-period plan, making the first set of objects. Next, the planner considers a ten-period planning horizon from period to period , deduces the optimal second-period plan, taking account of the newly considered eleventh period, and carries out the second-period plan.
Because the total utility to the consumer is a simple sum of the discounted utilities of all the possible goods in the economy, finding the optimal plan at any period is just a linear programming problem, and the results are a fixed ratio of construction activities of all the objects produced at that period. The fixed ratio of the activities is the mirror of price, relative to one good, taken as the arbitrary “currency,” or “numeraire.”
Over time, the model economy ticks forward. At each period, in general, only some of the possible goods and services are constructed. The others do not make the consumer happy enough. Over time, new goods and services come into existence, and old ones go out of existence in small and large avalanches of speciation and extinction events.
Thus, a grammar model, or a physical instantiation of a grammar model such as Lego World, is a toy world with a technology graph of objects and transformations. With the addition of utilities to the dierent objects for one consumer or a set of consumers and a social planner  or more generally, with a set of utilities for the objects that may dier among consumers and with dierent costs and scaling of costs with sizes of production runs of dierent Lego objects  a market economy can be constructed. With defined start-up costs, costs of borrowing money, and bankruptcy rules, a model economy with an evolving set of goods and services can be created and studied.
In general, such economies will advance persistently into the adjacent possible. And because the number of unique Lego objects in each rank is larger than the number in the preceding rank, the diversity of opportunities and objects tends to increase as ever more complex objects are constructed.
More generally, we need to consider “complements” and “substitutes.” Screw and screwdriver are complements; screw and nail are substitutes. Complements must be used together to create value; substitutes replace one another. Rather obviously, the complements and substitutes of any good or service constitute the economic niche in which that good or service lives. New goods enter the economy, typically, as complements and substitutes for existing goods. There is just no point in inventing the channel changer before the television set is invented and television programming is developed.
An economic web is just the set of goods and services in an economy, linked by red lines between substitutes and green lines between complements.
As we have seen, over the past million years, and even the past hundred years, the diversity of the economic web has increased. Why? Because, as in Lego World, the more objects there are in the economy, the more complement and substitute relations exist among those objects, as well as potential new objects in the adjacent possible. If there are N objects, the number of potential complement or substitute relations scales at least as N squared since each object might be a complement or substitute of any object. Thus, as the diversity of the objects in the web increases, the diversity of prospective niches for new goods and services increases even more rapidly! The very diversity of the economic web is autocatalytic.
If this view is correct, then diversity of goods and services is a major driver of economic growth. Indeed, I believe that the role of diversity of goods and services is the major unrecognized factor driving economic growth. Jane Jacobs had made the same point in her thoughtful books about the relation between economic growth and economic diversity of cities and their hinterlands. Economist Jose Scheinkman, now chairman of economics at the University of Chicago, and his colleagues studied a number of cities, normalized for total capitalization, and found that economic growth correlated with economic diversity in the city. In a similar spirit, microfinancing of a linked diversity of cottage businesses in the third world and the first world seems to be achieving local economic growth where more massive eorts at education and infrastructure, Aswan dams and power grids, seem to fail.
Indeed, in the same way in an ecosystem, organisms create niches for other organisms. I suspect, therefore, that over the past . billion years, the growth of diversity of species is autocatalytic, for the number of possible niches increases more rapidly than the number of species filling niches. And in the linking of spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes, the universe as a whole advances autocatalytically into its adjacent possible, driven by the very increase of diversity by which novel displacements from equilibrium come into existence, are detected, are coupled to, and come to drive the endergonic creation of novel kinds of molecules and other entities. Economic growth is part and parcel of the creativity of the universe as a whole.
Think of the Wright brothers’ airplane. It was a recombination between an airfoil, a light gasoline engine, bicycle wheels, and a propeller. The more objects an economy has, the more novel objects can be constructed. When we were working with rough stone in the Lower Paleolithic, we pretty much mastered everything that could be done until pressure flaking came along. Most forms of simple stone tools that could be made were made. Today, the adjacent possible of goods and services is so vast that the economy, stumbling and lunging into the future adjacent possible, will only construct an ever smaller subset of the technologically possible.
The economy is ever more historically contingent   .   .   . As the biosphere is ever more historically contingent   .   .   . As, I suspect, the universe is ever more historically contingent.
We are on a trajectory, given a classical N-dimensional phase space, where the dimensionality of the adjacent possible does seem to increase secularly and the universe is not about to repeat itself in its nonergodic flow.
A fourth law?
I now discuss an algorithmic model of the real economic web, the one outside in the bustling world of the shopping mall, of mergers and acquisitions. While powerful, however, no algorithmic model is complete, for neither the biosphere nor the econosphere is finitely prestatable. Indeed, the eort to design and construct an algorithmic model of the real economic web will simultaneously help us see the weakness of any finite description.
It all hangs on object-oriented programming. 
A case in point is the recent advent of Java, an object-based language, which, as of February had a library of some eighty thousand Java objects. Goodness knows how fast this library of objects is growing. Among the Java objects are “carburetor” objects, “engine block” objects, and “piston” objects, and objects come with “functional” descriptors, such as “is a,” “has a,” “does a,” “needs a,” “uses a.”
Both implicitly and, with modest work, explicitly, the “piston” object can discover that it fits into the cylinder hole in the “engine block” object to create a completed piston in a cylinder. The “carburetor” object can discover that it is to be located on top of the “engine block” object, connected to certain “gas line” objects in certain ways.
The physical engine block and piston, in reality, are complements, used together to create value. Thus, the representations of the engine block and piston as algorithmic Java objects, together with algorithmic “search engines” to match the corresponding “is a,” “has a,” “does a,” functions of complements and even substitutes, can as a matter of principle  and practicality  create an image of the real complements and substitutes in the real economic web.
In a fundamental sense, an appropriate set of Java objects, together with search engines for complements and substitutes matching “is a,” “has a,” “does a,” constitutes a grammar of objects and linkings or transformations among objects. The grammar may be context independent or context sensitive or richer.
In short, properly carried out, Java objects and the proper search engines can create a technology graph of all the objects and transformed objects constructible from any founder set of objects. The Java objects are like Lego World. And Lego World, stated in terms of building simple combinatorial objects, is logically similar to a set of objectives that must be achieved by a military force to carry out its total objective. Entities and operations are deeply similar, as we will explore further below. Technology graphs concern objects and actions, things and objectives, products and processes in a single framework.
Therefore, in principle, we have begun to specify a means to characterize large patches of the global economic web. Let each of very many firms, at dierent levels of disaggregation, create Java objects proper to their activities, building materials, partially processed materials, partially achieved objectives, and objectives including products. Let these Java objects be characterized by appropriate “is a,” “has a,” “does a,” lists, with adequate search engines looking for complements and substitutes. The result is a distributed web of Java objects linked functionally in at least many or most of the ways that are actually in use as complements and substitutes creating the millions of dierent goods and services in the current economy.
Much is of interest about such data on the real economic web. Among other features, any such graph has graph-typical characteristics. Some goods are central to the web, the car, computer, and so forth. Others are peripheral, such as the hula hoop and pet rock. Presumably, location of its products in the web structure has a great deal to do with the strategic position of a firm.
But there is more, for the economic web states its own adjacent possible. Given the Queen Mary and an umbrella, the umbrella placed in the smoke stack of the Queen Mary is in the adjacent possible. Not much use. But what about a small umbrella on the back of a Cessna that opens upon landing: Ah, an air brake is a possible new good in the adjacent possible a few steps from here.
And still more. What are the statistics of the transformation of an economic web over time as new goods and services arise in the niches aorded by existing goods and services, and drive old goods and services extinct? No one makes Roman siege engines these days. Cruise missiles do the job better.
I believe such object-based economic web tools will come into existence in the near future. Indeed, Bios Group is involved in inventing and making them. And I believe that such tools will be very powerful means of coordinating activities within supply chains and within the larger economy when linked by automated markets.
But I do not believe any such algorithmic tool can be complete. Consider the case of the engineers discovering that the engine block is so rigid that the block itself can serve as the chassis for the tractor they are trying to invent. That exaptation seems a genuine discovery. Now imagine that we had had Java object models of all the parts that were to go into the tractor: engine block objects, carburetor objects, piston objects. If, among the properties of the engine block  the proud “is a,” “has a,” “does a,” features  we had not listed ahead of time the very rigidity of the engine block or if that rigidity was not deducible from the other listed properties, then my vaunted economic web model with its algorithmically accessible adjacent possible could not have ever come up with the suggestion: Use the engine block, due to its rigidity, as the chassis.
You see again that unless there is a finite predescription of all the potentially relevant properties of a real physical object, our algorithmic approach can be powerful, but incomplete. Yet I cannot see how to construct such a finite predescription of all the potentially relevant properties of a real physical object in the real universe.
The world is richer than all our dreams, Horatio.
I must say to Arrow and Debreu, “Gentlemen, the set of goods and services is not finitely prestatable, so fixed-point theorems are of limited use.”
And to my economist colleagues: Consider the economy as forever becoming, burgeoning with new ways of making a living, new ways of creating value and advantages of trade, while old ways go extinct. This too is the proper subject for your study, not just allocation of scarce resources and achievement of market-clearing prices. The economy, like the biosphere, is about persistent creativity in ways of making a living.
I find it intriguing to note certain parallels from our prior discussion of autonomous agents and propagating organization. At the level of molecular autonomous agents, I made the point repeatedly that work is the constrained release of energy and that autonomous agents do carry out work to construct the constraints on the release of energy such that the energy is released along specific channels and such that specific couplings of nonequilibrium energy sources to propagating organization arise. Think then of the role of laws and contracts, whose constraints enable the linked flow of economic activities down particular corridors of activities. The web of economic activities flows down channels whose constraints are largely legal in nature. The coming into existence of the enabling constraints of law is as central to economic development and growth as any other aspect of the bubbling activity.
Robust Constructibility
My first purpose in investing in an entire box of Legos was to explore and define concepts of “robust constructibility.” We have succeeded, but run into fascinating problems of a general phase transition in problem solvability. In turn, this very phase transition suggests that in a coconstructing biosphere or econosphere rather specific restrictions arise and are respected by critters and firms, creatures and cognoscenti.
Recall the Lego founder set, and the rings, rank , rank ,   .   .   .   , rank ,,   .   .   .   each containing the unique Lego objects first constructible from the founder set in a number of steps equal to the rank of that ring. Suppose a given Lego house is first constructible in twenty steps, hence, lies in rank . Now, it might be the case that there is a single construction pathway from the founder set to the Lego house in twenty steps. It might also be the case that there are thousands of construction pathways to the Lego house in twenty steps. In the latter case, intuitively, construction of the Lego house is robust. If one way is blocked, say because x blocks are temporarily used up, then a neighboring pathway will allow the Lego house to be constructed without delay, that is, in twenty steps, using other block sizes.
A related sense of robustly constructibility concerns how the number of ways to construct the Lego house increases if we take more than the minimum twenty steps, say, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three,   .   .   .   steps. The number of ways may not increase at all or very slowly or hyperexponentially. If the number of ways increases very rapidly, it might be worth using twenty-two steps to make the Lego house, for it would be virtually impossible to block construction even if several types of building blocks and machines were temporarily broken.
But recall Boeing’s question. They wanted to build a family of related objects. Hence, let us define still another related sense of robustly constructible.
Consider a family of Lego objects, a house, and a house with a chimney. Now consider each of the many ways from the founder set to build the Lego house. For each such way to build the Lego house, consider how to change construction minimally in order to build the Lego house with the chimney. Perhaps the chimney can just be added to the completed Lego house. More likely, it would be necessary to partially deconstruct that completed Lego house, then go on to construct the house with the chimney. So there is a last branch point during construction on the way both to the Lego house and the Lego house with the chimney.
The branch point object and/or operation that is simultaneously on the way to the house and the house with the chimney is an interesting intermediate-complexity object or operation because it is polyfunctional. It can be used in at least two further ways.
When we build a house, we all know that boards and nails are primitive objects and the completed house is the finished object. But some intermediate objects, say, framed windows and framed walls, are commonly used. Why? Because they are intermediate objects that are polyfunctional. The technology graph and its branch points are identifying the intermediate-complexity polyfunctional objects for us.
But things are more subtle. It might be the case that from the last branch point on a way to make both the house and the house with the chimney there is only a single pathway forward to the house and there is only a single pathway forward to the house with the chimney. Not robust. Stupid stopping spot. Either pathway can readily be blocked. Suppose instead we consider an intermediate object three steps prior to the last branch point on the way outward from the founder set. Ah, perhaps there are thousands of ways to complete the house and to complete the house with the chimney. Any single blockage or small set of blockages is readily overcome. The house, or the house with the chimney, can be built without delay if all  x blocks are temporarily out of stock. Now this is a smart, robust, intermediate-complexity polyfunctional object-objective. And it may cost no more to stockpile such smart intermediate objects!
So, here is a new view of process design and inventory control.
Bios colleague Jim Herriot has made a delightful little Java computer model to show technology graphs in action. The program shows a “chair” object, a “seat” object, a “back” object, and a “leg” object. In addition, there are “foam” and “padding” objects, two “attachment” objects, a set of “screw” objects, “nail” objects, “wood” objects, a “saw” object, a “hammer” object, and a “screwdriver” object. Each object comes with its own characteristic set of “is a,” “has a,” “does a,” features.
The program assembles coherent technology graphs and chair-assembly pathways as follows: An object tries a connection, shown by a black line, to another object. In eect, the chair object extends a line to the screw object as it says, “I need a lean-on! I need a lean-on!” The screw object responds, “I do twist holds, I do twist holds!” There is no match. After many random tries, the “chair” object extends a black line to the “back” object. “I need a lean-on, I need a lean-on,” says the “chair” object. “I do lean-ons, I do lean-ons,” cries the “back” object with cybernetic joy. The black line becomes a yellow line as a contract is signed between the “chair” and “back” objects. In a similar way, the “back” object needs “padding” and “wood” objects, and either the complementary pair “nail and hammer” objects or their substitutes, “screw and screwdriver” objects, to carry out an “attachment” operation.
In due course, the conditions are met to begin construction of partial objects on the way to the entire chair. Legs, then backs, begin to be assembled as screws and nails are used up. Eventually, a seat is constructed too, and the first chair triumphantly follows.
All goes well until all the screws are used up. The seat, having relied on screws and screwdrivers to attach padding, goes nuts and looks about frantically, asking the screwdriver to work on nails. No luck. Eventually, the seat tries nails and hammers jointly, and that complementary pair works. More chairs are constructed, then nails run out and failures propagate throughout the system.
Not a metaphor, the technology graph. Rather, a new tool to understand the general principles of robust constructibility, the structure of economic webs, a knowledge-management tool for a firm, a new hunk of basic science. Indeed, one of the interesting features of technology graphs is that they constitute the proper conceptual framework to consider process and product design simultaneously. As far as I can tell, we have not had such a conceptual framework before.
Nor is the technology graph limited to manufacturing. The same general principles apply, for example, in military or other logistic operations. Technology graphs, in these other contexts, become the sequential set of requirements needed to meet subobjectives that robustly culminate in the achievement of an overall objective. Taking hill after diverting gracefully from orders to take hill is logically related to making the house with the chimney after starting to make the house without the chimney.
A Phase Transition in Problem Solvability
Part of the basic science of technology graphs stems from generic phase transitions in problem solvability in many combinatorial optimization or satisficing problems in biology and economics. I turn now to discuss these generic phase transitions.
I begin with a metaphor. You are in the Alps. A yellow bromine fog is present. Anyone in the fog for more than a microsecond will die. There are three regimes: the “dead,” the “living dead,” and the “survivable.”
The “dead”: The bromine fog is higher than Mont Blanc. Unfortunately, everyone dies.
The “living dead”: The bromine fog has drifted lower and Mont Blanc, the Eiger, and the Matterhorn jut into the sunlight. Hikers near these three peaks are alive.
But consider that even mountains are not fixed. Plate tectonics can deform the mountainous landscape. Or, in the terms of the last chapter, the mountainous fitness landscape of a species or a firm or an armed force can change and persistently deform due to coevolution when other species or firms or adversaries change strategies. If the mountainous landscape deforms, Mont Blanc, the Eiger, and the Matterhorn will eventually dip into the bromine fog. As this happens, perhaps new peaks jut into the sunshine. But those peaks will typically be far away from Mont Blanc, the Eiger, and the Matterhorn.
Alas, the hikers near those three initial peaks will die as they are dipped into the lethal fog and are too far from the newly emerged sun drenched peaks to reach them. This “isolated peaks regime” is the living dead regime.
But there is a third regime a phase transition away.
The survivable regime: Let the bromine fog drift lower. More and more peaks jut into the sunshine. At some point, some magical point, as more peaks emerge into the sunshine, quite suddenly, a hiker can walk all the way across the Alps in the sunshine.
This is a phase transition from the isolated peaks regime. A connected web  mathematically, a percolating web  of connected “solutions” has emerged suddenly as the fog lowers. Now consider hikers striding across the Alps, knapsacks and hearts full. If plate tectonics rather slowly deforms the landscape, then whenever hikers are about to be dipped into the lethal bromine fog, they can take a sideways step in some direction and remain in the sunshine.
The percolating web of solutions regime is persistently survivable. In fitness landscape terms, if you are evolving on a fitness landscape that is deforming and are in your survivable regime, you can continue to exist by stepping somewhere from wherever you happen to find yourself.
This phase transition is generic to hard combinatorial optimization problems. A case in point is the well-known job shop problem. The job shop problem posits M machines and O objects. The idea is to build the O objects on the machines. Each object requires being on each machine in some set order for some fixed period of time. Perhaps object must be on machine for minutes, then machine for minutes, then machine for minutes. In turn, object must be on machine for minutes, then machine for minutes, and so on.
A schedule is an assignment of objects to machines such that all objects are constructed. The total length of time it takes to construct the set of objects is called the “makespan.” We may consider, for each schedule, a definition of neighboring schedules, such as swapping the order in which two objects are assigned to a given machine. Given the set of possible schedules, the neighborhood relation between schedules, and the makespan of each schedule, there is a makespan fitness landscape over the space of schedules of the job shop problem.
We want to minimize makespan. But to keep our mountainous landscape metaphor where high peaks are good, let us consider optimizing eciency by minimizing makespan. So schedules with low makespan correspond to points of high eciency on the job-shop fitness landscape. Clearly, short makespan makes the problem hard, long makespan makes the problem easy. So long makespan is like the bromine fog being low, while short makespan is like the bromine fog being high.
Does the phase transition occur in typical job shop problems as makespan is tuned from long to short? Figure . shows the results Vince Darley obtained. The figure plots makespan, short to long, on the x-axis and the number of schedules at a given makespan on the y-axis.
As you can see, for long enough makespan, as makespan decreases there are roughly a constant number of schedules at each makespan. But at a critically short makespan, the number of solutions starts to fall abruptly. The corner where the curve starts to turn is the phase transition between the survivable regime for longer makespans and the isolated peaks/living dead regime for shorter makespans. (I cheat slightly, the sharpness of the corner increases as the size of the job shop problem increases in numbers of machines, M, and objects, O.)
There are a number of direct tests for this phase transition. In the survivable regime, at longer makespans and lower eciency than the phase transition makespan, start with a given schedule at a given makespan. Now examine all “nearby” schedules and test if any is of an equal or better makespan. Continue to “walk” across the space of schedules via neighbors to test if there is a connected web of schedules with makespans at least as good as our initial schedule’s makespan. Either the web percolates across the space of solutions or it does not. If the web percolates, then the initial schedule was in the survivable regime. If only isolated regions of neighboring schedules of the same approximate makespan are found, then you are in the isolated peaks regime.
A second test looks at the “Hausdorf dimensionality” of the acceptable solutions at a given makespan or better. The Hausdorf dimension is computed by considering an initial schedule at a given makespan, then by considering from among all the -mutant neighbor schedules the number of them that are of the same or better makespan as the initial schedule’s makespan, then doing the same among all the -mutant neighbor schedules. The Hausdorf dimension of the acceptable set of schedules at that makespan and point in the job shop space is the ratio of the logarithm of the -mutant acceptable schedules to the logarithm of the -mutant acceptable schedules. In eect, the Hausdorf dimension shows how rapidly  in how many dimensions of the job-shop schedule space  acceptable schedules of a given makespan or better are growing. In the survivable regime, the Hausdorf dimension, on average, is greater than.  In the isolated peaks regime, averaged over the job shop space, the Hausdorf dimension is less than.  At the phase transition, the dimensionality is. 
The phase transition I have just noted is generic for many or most hard combinatorial optimization problems. It is not true for all fitness landscapes. For example, it would not hold on a conical Fujiyama landscape. But the Fuji landscape corresponds to a simple, typically linear, optimization problem. Hard combinatorial optimization problems are multipeaked due to conflicting constraints.
A further interesting connection relates the statistics of search on the job shop landscape to learning curves in economics. Learning curves, well known in arenas from airplane manufacture to diamond cutting to cigar manufacture, show that every time the total output of a plant is doubled, the cost per unit falls by a rough constant percentage, typically to percent. If the logarithm of the cost per unit is plotted on the y-axis and the logarithm of the cumulative number of units produced is plotted on the x-axis, one gets a typical straight-line power law that decreases downward to the right.
The fascinating thing is that this feature probably reflects the statistics of search for fitter variants on rugged, correlated fitness landscapes such as the job shop problem. Typically, in such problems, every time a fitter -mutant variant is found, the fraction of -mutant variants that are still fitter falls by a constant fraction, while the improvement achieved at each step is typically a constant fraction of the improvement achieved at the last step. These properties yield the learning curve. My colleagues Jose Lobo, Phil Auerswald, Karl Shell, Bill Macready, and I have published a number of papers on the application of the statistics of rugged landscapes and learning curves.
But there is another even more important point. We can control the statistical structure of the problem spaces we face such that the problem space is more readily solvable. We can, and do, tune the structure of the problems we solve. The capacity to tune landscape structure shows up in the job shop problem. In most cases, improving the structure of the problem space requires relaxing conflicting constraints to move the problem into the survivable regime at the makespan, or eciency, you require. For a specific case, in my statement of the job shop problem, I asserted that the O objects must each have access to the M machines in some fixed order.
Now simple observation and experience tells you that you can put on your shirt and pants in either order, but you had better put on your socks before your shoes. In other words, some steps in life are permutable, others are not. Suppose in our job shop problem, a fixed fraction, P, of the steps in the construction of each of the O objects were jointly permutable. As P increases and more steps are permutable, the conflicting constraints in the total problem are reduced. But this in turn means that the entire space of solutions improves, that is, the entire space shifts toward lower makespan, or higher eciency.
And now the relation to the bromine fog metaphor can be stated clearly. As the number of permutable steps increases, the conflicting constraints are reduced. The entire makespan-eciency landscape is lifted higher, the peaks are higher, and the landscape, with fewer conflicting constraints, is smoother. All in all, the result is that the percolating web of solutions where the hikers can walk all across the Alps occurs at a higher eciency and shorter makespan.
In terms of Figure ., the capacity to permute steps in the job shop problem shifts the phase transition point leftward, toward shorter makespan. Equivalently, if one wants to shift the curve in Figure . to the left, purchase a computable number of machines that are polyfunctional so that the same machine can be used for more than one job. That too reduces conflicting constraints.
There is another view of this generic phase transition between solvable and nonsolvable that again highlights the role of having alternative ways of doing things, robustly constructible strategies that are not easily blocked. In addition, the same simple model, the Ksat model discussed in the previous chapter, begins to account for at least the following anecdotal observation, which is apparently typical: Colleagues at Unilever noted to us that if they have a plant that manufactures dierent types of a product, say, toothpaste, then the plant does well when the diversity of products grows from three to four to ten to twenty to twenty-five, but at twenty-seven dierent toothpastes, the plant suddenly fails. So rather abruptly, as product diversity in a given plant increases, the system fails. 
Why? Presumably it is the same phase transition in problem solvability.
Consider again the Ksat problem, taken as a model for community assembly in the last chapter based on the work of Bruce Sawhill and Tim Keitt. Figure . repeats the Ksat problem and shows again the phase transition.
Recall that a Ksat problem consists in a logical statement with V variables, in C clauses, in normal disjunctive form: (A v A) and (A v A) and (not A v A). As we discussed in the previous chapter, a normal disjunctive expression with C clauses, V variables in total, and K variables per clause is satisfiable if there is an assignment of true or false to each of the V variables, such that the expression as a whole is true.
The normal disjunctive form makes it clear that as there is an increase in the number of alternative ways, K, of carrying out a task, or making a clause true, it is easier to satisfy the combined expression. More generally, as noted in the last chapter and shown in Figure ., there is a phase transition in the probability that a random Ksat expression with V variables, K per clause, and C clauses can be satisfied by some assignment of true or false to the V variables. The phase transition occurs in the horizontal axis, labeled C/V, which is the mean number of clauses in which any variable occurs. Obviously, as C/V increases, conflicting constraints increase. The phase transition from easily solvable to virtually impossible to solve occurs at a point on the C/V axis equal to log x raised to the K power, or . x K. Hence, as K increases, the phase transition shifts outward to greater C/V values.
But Figure . gives us an intuitive understanding of Unilever’s problem, in fact, the problem is far more general than Unilever’s assembly plants. Think of each clause, (A v A), et cetera, as a way to make one of the toothpaste products, and think of the conjunction, (A v A) and (A v A) and   .   .   .   , as the way to make all twenty-seven toothpastes. Then as the number of clauses, hence toothpaste products, increases for a given plant with V variables to use in making these dierent products, all of a sudden the conjoint problem will have so many conflicting constraints that it will cross the phase transition from solvable to insolvable.
Moreover, for any given number of clauses and V variables, if a given assignment of true or false to the V variables satisfies the Ksat problem, we can ask if any of the -mutant neighbor assignments of true and false to the V variables that change the truth value assigned to one of the V variables also satisfy the Ksat problem. Thus, we can study the phase transition from a survivable percolating web of solutions regime when V/C is lower to an isolated peaks regime as V/C increases to virtual impossibility for high V/C.
Thus, just as in the job shop problem, as product diversity increases for a fixed plant, a phase transition from survivable to unsurvivable will occur because the conflicting constraints will increase with C/V. The resulting landscape becomes more rugged, the peaks lower, the yellow bromine fog rises from the survivable to the living dead to the dead regime, covering Mont Blanc and all hikers in the Alps (Figure .).
But this takes us back to the technology graph and robust constructibility. Recall from above that the Lego house and Lego house with a chimney might be robustly constructible from wisely chosen intermediate-complexity objects on the pathway to both houses, with thousands of ways to get there. At no extra cost, we might choose to stockpile that intermediate-complexity polyfunctional object rather than another choice.
But intermediate-complexity polyfunctional objects are just what allows multiple pathways, multiple permutations of construction steps to our two final objects. Hence, these same smart intermediate objects reduce the conflicting constraints in the fitness landscape over the construction space to make our desired set of objects, or our set of toothpastes. Lowering the conflicting constraints makes the eciency peaks of the fitness landscapes higher, hence, allows survivable operations at a higher level of product diversity.
Thus, by use of the technology graph to design both products and processes, we can choose a family of products and construction pathways with highly redundant intermediate objects. That choice makes the problem space easy to solve rather than hard to solve. We have thereby tuned the statistical structure of our problem space into a survivable regime. Furthermore, we can test whether our choice of construction pathways to the house and/or house with a chimney is robustly survivable or in the living dead–isolated peaks regime. We need merely use the technology graph to test for percolating sets of -mutant neighboring pathways of construction of the same objects and the average Hausdorf dimension of such pathways.
No need to operate in the isolated peaks regime. Indeed, if you face loss of parts and machines, you had best locate back from the phase transition, deep enough into the survivable regime to survive. And if you are a military force fighting against an enemy whose strategy changes persistently deform your payo landscape and whose eorts are to destroy your capacity to fight, you had best operate even further back from the phase transition in the survivable regime. Indeed, the normal disjunctive form in Figure . is a rough image of the complexity of a campaign you can fight  the number of clauses that must be jointly satisfied to meet your objectives, where each clause is a subobjective and there are K alternative ways to meet that objective using V weapon systems.
Just as warfare and the economy as a whole have much in common, warfare and the biosphere have much in common. If you are a species coevolving with other species, you had best operate back from the phase transition well into the survivable regime.
There is a message: If you must make a living, for God’s sake, make your problem space survivable!
This brings us back to a point made in early chapters. Recall the no-free-lunch theorem proved by Bill Macready and David Wolpert. Given a family of all possible fitness landscapes, on average, no search algorithm outperforms any other search algorithm. Hill climbing is, on average, no better than random search in finding high peaks, when averaged over all possible fitness landscapes.
The no-free-lunch theorem led me to wonder about the following: We organisms use mutation, recombination, and selection in evolution, and we pay twofold fitness for sex and recombination to boot. But recombination is only a useful search procedure on smooth enough fitness landscapes where the high peaks snuggle rather near one another.
In turn, this led me to wonder where such nice fitness landscapes arise in evolution, for not all fitness landscapes are so blessedly smooth. Some are random. Some are anticorrelated.
In turn, this led me to think about and discuss natural games, or ways of making a living. Since ways of making a living evolve with the organisms making those livings, we got to the winning games are the games the winners play. Which led me to suggest that those ways of making a living that are well searched out and exploited by the search mechanisms organisms happen to use  mutation, recombination, and selection  will be ways of making a living that are well populated by organisms and similar species. Ways of making a living that cannot be well searched out by organisms and their mutation recombination search procedures will not be well populated.
So we came to the reasonable conclusion that a biosphere of autonomous agents is a self-consistently self-constructing whole, in which agents, ways of making a living, and ways of searching for how to make a living all work together to coconstruct the biosphere. Happily, we are picking the problems we can manage to solve. Of course, if we could not solve our chosen ways to make livings, we would be dead.
And there is, I think, a molecular clue that the biosphere is persistently coconstructing itself in the survivable regime for a propagating set of lineages. We have just characterized the survivable percolating web regime where the fitness landscape of each creature deforms due to the adaptive moves of other creatures, but there are always neighboring ways of surviving. Genetically, those neighboring ways are one or a few mutations or recombinations away from where the species population is right now. If the biosphere has coconstructed itself such that most species are in a survivable regime, then as coevolution occurs, most species will persist but may well transform, for example, to daughter species. One would guess that this mildly turbulent process is rather continuous, perhaps with some self-organized critical bursts on a power law scale.
The “molecular clock hypothesis” seems to fit these facts. If one compares hemoglobins from humans, chimps, horses, whales, and so on, in general, the longer ago we diverged from one another in the evolutionary record, the more amino acid mutations distinguish the hemoglobins of the two species involved. Our hemoglobin is very similar to chimp hemoglobin and quite dierent from the whale. So good is this correlation that, within given protein families, it is argued that mutations accumulate with timelike clockwork, hence the molecular clock hypothesis, in which a number of amino acid dierences can be taken as a surrogate for time from the most common ancestor. Dierent protein family clocks seem to run at dierent rates.
There is evidence that the clock does not run quite smoothly. John Gillespie, a population biologist now at the University of California at Davis, showed some years ago that amino acid substitutions seemed to come in short bursts that accumulate over long periods of time to a rough molecular clock that “stutters.” Gillespie argued that fitness landscapes were episodically shifting and the bursts of amino acid substitutions were adaptive runs toward nearby newly formed peaks. I agree and suggest that the near accuracy of the molecular clock data over hundreds of millions of years and virtually all species strongly suggests that the biosphere has coconstructed itself such that species, even as they speciate and go extinct, are, as lineages, in the persistently survivable regime.
We as organisms have, in fact, constructed our ways of making a living such that those problem spaces are typically, but not always, solvable as coevolution proceeds. And, on average, the same thing holds for the econosphere. As old ways of making a living go extinct, new ones persistently enter. We too, it appears, have coconstructed our econosphere such that our ways of making a living, and discovering new ways of making a living, are manageable, probably in a self-organized critical manner, with small and large speciation and extinction events.
And there is a corollary: If you are lucky enough to be in the survivable regime, you can survive by being adaptable. What is required to be adaptable as an organism or organization? We discussed this in the last chapter. A good guess is that an organism or organization needs to be poised in an ordered regime, near the edge of chaos, where a power law distribution of small and large avalanches of change propagates through the system such that it optimizes the persistent balance between exploration and exploitation on ever-shifting, coevolving fitness landscapes.
Laws for any biosphere extend, presumably, to laws for any economy. Nor should that be surprising. The economy is based on advantages of trade. But those advantages accrue no more to humans exchanging apples and oranges than to root nodules and fungi exchanging sugar and fixed nitrogen such that both make enhanced livings. Thus, economics must partake of the vast creativity of the universe. Molecules, species, and economic systems are advancing into an adjacent possible. In all cases, one senses a secular trend for diversity to increase, hence for the dimensionality of the adjacent possible to increase in our nonergodic journey.
Perhaps again we glimpse a fourth law.




Chapter 10
A Coconstructing Cosmos?
rom biospheres to the cosmos? Yes, because they may share general themes. The major enquiry of Investigations has concerned autonomous agents and their coconstruction of biospheres and econospheres whose configuration spaces cannot be finitely prestated. These themes find echoes in thinking about the cosmos as a whole. But abundant caution: I am not a physicist, the problems are profound, and we risk nonsense.
Whatever the risk, two facts are true. First, since the big bang our universe has become enormously complex. Second, we do not have a theory for why the universe is complex. Equally unarguably, the biosphere has increased in molecular diversity over the past four billion years, just as the standing diversity of species has increased. And equally unarguably, the econosphere has become more complex over the past few million years of hominid evolution. We know this with confidence. If we lack a theory, it is not because the staggering facts of increasing diversity and complexity that stare us in the face do not deserve a theory to account for them.
But we have seen hints of such a theory in the coconstruction of biospheres and econospheres by the self-consistent search of autonomous agents for ways to make a living, the resulting exapting novel ways of making livings, the fact that new adjacent niches for yet further new species grow in diversity faster than the species whose generation creates those new adjacent possible niches, and the search mechanisms to master those modes of being. We have seen a glimmer of something like a fourth law, a tendency for self-constructing biospheres to enlarge their workspace, the dimensionality of their adjacent possible, perhaps as fast, on average, as is possible  glimmers only, not yet well-founded theory nor well-established fact. But glimmers often precede later science.
Consider again how the chemical diversity of the biosphere has become more diverse in the past four billion years, urged into its adjacent possible by the genuine chemical potential from the chemical actual into the adjacent possible, where the actual substrates exist and the adjacent possible products do not yet exist. Each time the molecular diversity of the biosphere expands, the set of adjacent possible reactions expands even faster. Recall our simple calculation that for modestly complex organic molecules, any pair of molecules could undergo at least one two substrate–two product reaction. But then the diversity of possible reactions is the square of the diversity of chemicals in the system. As the diversity of molecular species increases, there are always proportionally more novel reactions into the adjacent possible. If we take the formation of a chemical species that has never existed in the biosphere, or perhaps the universe, as a breaking symmetry, then the more such symmetries are broken, the more ways come into existence by which yet further symmetries may be broken.
And the chemical case makes clear the linking of the flows of matter and energy in this sprawling chemical diversity explosion. Many such reactions will link exergonic and endergonic processes. As this occurs, energy is pumped from the exergonic partner into the products requiring endergonic synthesis. These products  the chemical diversity in the bark of a redwood tree, for example  take their place in the chemical actual, poising the biosphere, and thus the universe, for its next plunge into the chemical adjacent possible.
Consider again equilibrium statistical mechanics. At its core, statistical mechanics relies on the same kind of statistical argument as does the flipping of a fair coin , times. We all understand that distributions of roughly , heads and , tails are far more probable macrostates than distributions with all heads or all tails. Now consider the general argument I have made that as molecular diversity increases, the diversity of reactions increases even faster, and that there is a genuine chemical potential from the actual into the adjacent possible. And consider again the general argument made just above that the greater the diversity of molecular species and reactions, the more likely the coupling of exergonic and endergonic reaction pairs driving the endergonic synthesis of new adjacent possible molecules that poise the system to advance again into the next adjacent possible. While the detailed statistical form of these chemical reaction graphs are not yet known, they too smell of “law.” As in the case of fair coin flips and equilibrium statistical mechanics, it is as if here again the mathematical structure compels the consequent behavior of matter and energy. In the case of the nonergodic and nonequilibrium chemical flux into the adjacent possible, the universe is busy diversifying itself into myriad complexity.
The universe is enormously complex, and we don’t really yet know why. May there be new ways of thinking of the cosmos itself? If a mere glimmer can be acceptable as potentially useful early science, then the burden of this chapter is to suggest perhaps, yes.
It is not obvious, in fact, that the universe should be complex. One can imagine universes governed by general relativity that burst briefly into big bang being, then recollapse in a rapid big crunch within parts of a second or a century. Alternatively, one can imagine universes governed by general relativity that burst into big bang being and expanded forever with no further complexity than hydrogen and helium and smaller particles in an open and ever-expanding dark, cold vastness.
Here we are, poised, it seems (but see below) between a universe that will expand forever and a universe that will eventually ease into gentle contraction, then rush to a big crunch.
Our fundamental theories in physics, and just one level up, biology, remain un-united. Einstein’s austere general relativity, our theory of space, time, and geometry on the macroscale, floats untethered to quantum mechanics, our theory of the microscale, seventy-five years after quantum mechanics emerged in Schrödinger’s equation form for wave mechanics. Theoretically apart, general relativity and quantum mechanics are both verified to eleven decimal places by appropriate tests. But it remains true that general relativity and quantum mechanics remain fitfully fit, fitfully un-united. And Darwin’s view of persistent coevolution remains by and large unconnected with our fundamental physics, even though the evolution of the biosphere is manifestly a physical process in the universe. Physicists cannot escape this problem by saying, “Oh, that’s biology.”
The Complexity of the Universe
Why the universe is complex rather than simple is, in fact, beginning to emerge as a legitimate and deep question. In the past several years, I have had the pleasure to come to know Lee Smolin, whose career is devoted to quantum gravity and cosmology. Most of what I shall write in this chapter reflects my conversations and work with Lee and his colleagues, who have been wonderfully welcoming to this biologist. Sometimes outsiders can make serious contributions. Sometimes outsiders just make damned fools of themselves.
Caveat lector, but I will continue.
In Smolin’s book, The Life of the Cosmos, he raises directly the question of why the universe is complex. Current particle physics has united three of the four fundamental forces  the electromagnetic, weak, and strong forces called the “standard model.” With general relativity, which deals with the remaining force, gravity; this provides a consistent framework. Particle physics plus general relativity have altogether some twenty “constants” of nature, which are parameters of the standard model and general relativity, such as the value of Planck’s constant, h; the fine structure constant, that is, the ratio of the electron rest mass to proton rest mass; the gravitational constant, g; and so forth. Smolin puts approximate maximum and minimum bounds on these twenty constants and asks a straightforward question: In a twenty-dimensional parameter space ranging over the plausible values of these twenty constants, what volume of that parameter space is consistent with values of the constants that would yield a complex universe with stars, chemistry, and potentially, life?
Smolin’s rough answer is that the volume of parameter space for the constants of nature that would yield a complex universe are something like raised to the minus th power. That is, a tiny fraction of the possible combinations of the values of the constants are consistent with the existence of chemistry and stars, as well as life. For the universe to be complex, the constants must be sharply tuned.
Smolin’s argument could be o by many orders of magnitude without destroying his central point: The fact that our universe is complex, based on our current theories of the standard model and general relativity, is surprising, even astonishingly surprising.
Many physicists have remarked upon this fine tuning of the constants.
There have been several responses to this issue, some raised prior to Smolin’s work. One is based on a view of multiple universes and the “weak anthropic principle.” This principle states that there exist multiple universes, but only those universes that were complex would sport life forms with the wit to wonder why their universe was complex. So the very fact that we humans are here to wonder about this issue merely means that we happen to be in one of the complex universes among vastly many universes. The argument is at least coherent. But it’s hard to be thrilled by this answer.
The “strong anthropic principle” goes further  indeed, too far  and posits that, for mysterious reasons, the universe is contrived such that life must arise to observe it and wonder at it. Few think the strong anthropic principle counts as science in any guise.
Smolin points out that there are two possible answers to the puzzle of the complexity of the universe. Either we will find a parameter-free description  a kind of supertheory  that yields something like our complex universe with its constants, or some historical process must pick those constants. Smolin proposes the possibility of “cosmic natural selection.” Here, daughter universes are born of black holes. Universes with more black holes will have more daughter universes. Given minor heritable variation in the constants of the laws of the daughter universes, cosmic natural selection will select for universes whose constants support the formation of a near-maximum number of black holes. He then argues that on very crude calculations most alterations in the known constants would be expected to lower the number of black holes. Lee points out that his theory is testable, for example, by deducing that our constants correspond to near-maximum black hole production, and that his theory has not been ruled out yet.
I confess I am fond of and admire Lee Smolin a great deal, but I don’t like his hypothesis. Why? Well, preferably, one would like a theory that had the consequence that any universe would be complex like ours and roughly poised between expansion and contraction. We have no such theory at present, of course. The remainder of this chapter discusses ideas and a research program that just might point in this direction.
As a start, we can begin with the most current view of the large-scale structure and dynamics of the universe. The most recent evidence suggests that on a large enough scale the universe is flat, the matter distribution is isotropic, and  a recent surprise  the universe may be expanding at an accelerating rate. This latest result, if it holds true, contravenes the accepted view of the past several decades that the rate of expansion of the universe has been gradually slowing since the big bang. The hypothesis that the universe is exactly poised between persistent expansion and eventual collapse has held that the rate of expansion of the universe will gradually slow, but never stop.
One way to explain a persistent accelerating expansion of a flat universe is to reintroduce Einstein’s “cosmological constant” into the field equations of general relativity. A positive cosmological constant expresses itself as a repulsive force between masses that increases with the distance between those masses. Some physicists think that a positive cosmological constant must be associated with some new source of energy in free space. The source of such an energy is currently unknown.
Quantum Mechanics and Classicity
Before turning to the huge diculties of quantum gravity, we should review the fundamental mystery of quantum mechanics. Most readers are familiar with the famous two-slit experiment, which exhibits the fundamental oddness of quantum interference. Feynman, in his famous three-volume lectures on physics, gives the mystery as simply as possible: We begin with a gun shooting bullets. The bullets pass through one of two holes in a metal plate and fly further on, landing on a flat layer of sand in a box. Bullets passing through either hole may be deflected slightly by hitting the walls of the hole. Thus, in the sandbox behind the metal plate, we would expect, and actually would find, two mounds of bullets. Each mound would be centered on the line of flight of the bullet from the gun through the corresponding hole to the sandbox, with a “Gaussian” or normal bell-shaped distribution of bullet densities falling away from the peak of each mound.
When we use monochromatic light rather than bullets, we note the following: If the light hits the sandbox, changed into a photon-counter surface, we find that the size of the energetic impact is the same each time a photon hits the surface. Photons of a given wavelength have a fixed energy. A photon either is recorded at a point on the surface or not. Whenever one is recorded, the full parcel of energy has been detected at the surface. Now if only one hole is open, one gets the Gaussian mound result. Most photons pass through the hole unscathed and arrive in a straight line at the photon-counter surface. A Gaussian distribution peaked at that center is present because some photons are deflected slightly by the edges of the hole.
But if two holes are open, then one gets the famous interference pattern of light and dark interfering circles spreading from the centers on the photon-counter surface that were the peaks of the mounds seen when hole or hole was open. Of course, as Feynman points out, there is no way to account for this oddness in classical physics.
Quantum mechanics was built to account for the phenomenon. The Schrödinger equation is a wave equation. The wave that propagates from the photon gun is an undulating spherically spreading wave of probability “amplitude.” The amplitude at any point in space and time is the square root of the probability that the photon will be found located at that point. To obtain the actual probability, the amplitude must be squared.
A central feature of Schrödinger’s equation is its linearity. If two waves are propagating, the sum and dierences of those waves are also propagating. It is the essential linearity of quantum mechanics that makes the next puzzle, the link from quantum to classical worlds, so dicult. For a central puzzle of quantum mechanics becomes the relation between this odd quantum world of possible events, where the possibilities can propagate, but never become actual, and the classical world of actual events.
A variety of approaches to the liaison between the quantum and classical realms exist. The first is the “Copenhagen interpretation,” which speaks of the “measurement event,” when the quantum object interacts with a macroscopic classical object, the measuring device, and a single one of the propagating possibilities becomes actual in the measurement event, thereby “collapsing” the wave function. A second approach is the Everett multiworld hypothesis, which asserts that every time a quantum choice happens, the universe splits into two parallel universes. No one seems too happy with the Everett interpretation. And few seem very sure what the Copenhagen interpretation’s collapse of the wave function might really mean.
Meanwhile, there are two other long-standing approaches to the link between the quantum and classical worlds. The first is Feynman’s famous sum over all possible trajectories, or histories, approach. In quantum mechanics, we are to imagine a given possible pathway of the photon from the photon gun through the screen with the two slits to the photon-counting surface. For each pathway, there is a well-defined procedure to assign an “action.” This action can be thought of as having an amplitude and a phase, and the phase rotates through a full circle, pi, many times along the pathway. According to the Feynman scheme, classical trajectories correspond to quantum pathways possessing minimal action.
Consider, says Feynman, all the pathways that start at the photon gun and end up at the same point on the photon-counting surface. Nearly parallel, nearly straight-line pathways, have nearly the same action. So when those pathways interact, they have nearly the same phase, and their interaction yields constructive interference, which tends to build up amplitude. Thus, pathways that are near the classical pathway interact constructively to build up amplitude. By contrast, quirky crooked pathways between the photon gun and the same point on the counter screen have very dierent actions, hence very dierent phases, and interact destructively, so their amplitudes tend to cancel. The classical pathway, therefore, is simultaneously the most probable pathway over the sum of histories of all possible pathways, and the pathway that requires the least action.
The result is beautiful, but has two problems. First, Feynman assumes a continuous background space and time in his theory. Quantum gravity, as we will see, cannot make that assumption in the first place. Rather space, or geometry, is a discrete, self-constructing object on its own. Thus, achieving a smooth space and time is supposed to be a consequence of an adequate theory of quantum gravity. If Feynman’s sum over histories must assume a smooth background space and time, then it cannot as such be taken as primitive in quantum gravity. Second, granting a continuous background space and time, Feynman’s sum over all histories still only gives a maximum of the amplitude for the photon to travel the classical pathway, it never gives an actual photon arriving at the counting surface. No more than any other does Feynman overcome the fundamental linearity of quantum mechanics. We still have to collapse the wave function. Despite these problems, Feynman’s results are brilliant, and at least we see a link between the classical and quantum worlds, if not yet actual photons striking counters.
But there is an alternative approach to the link between the quantum and the classical worlds. This possible approach is based on the well-established phenomenon of “decoherence.” Decoherence arises when a quantum-coherent Schrödinger wave is propagating and the quantum system interacts with another quantum system having many coupled variables, or degrees of freedom. The consequence can be that the Schrödinger wave function of the first quantum system becomes entangled in very complex ways with the other complex quantum system, which may be thought of as the environment. Rather like water waves swirling into tiny granular nooks and crannies along a rugged fractal beach, the initial coherent Schrödinger equation representing the initial quantum system swirls into tiny and highly diverse patterns of interaction with the quantum system representing the environment. The consequence of this intermixing is decoherence.
To understand the core of decoherence, one must understand that the exhibition of interference phenomena, the hallmark of quantum mechanics noted in the double-slit photon experiment, requires that literally all the propagating possible pathways in Feynman’s sum over histories that are to arrive at each point on the photon-counter surface, do in fact arrive at that point. If some fail to arrive, the sum over all histories fails. In eect, if some of the phase information, the core of constructive and destructive interference, has been lost in the maze of interactions of the quantum system with its environment, then that phase information cannot come to be reassembled to give rise to quantum interference.
Decoherence is accepted by most physicists. For example, in attempts to build quantum computers that can carry out more than one calculation simultaneously due to the linear features of quantum mechanics, actual decoherence is currently a technical hurdle in obtaining complex quantum calculations.
Decoherence, then, aords a way that phase information can be lost, thereby collapsing the wave function in a nonmysterious fashion. Thus, some physicists hope that decoherence provides a natural link between the quantum and classical realms. Notable among these physicists are James Hartle and Murray Gell-Mann, whose views can be found in Gell-Mann’s The Quark and the Jaguar. In essence, Hartle and Gell-Mann ask us to consider “the quantum state of the universe” and all possible quantum histories of the universe from its initial state. Some of these histories of the universe may happen to decohere. Hartle and Gell-Mann argue that the decoherent histories of the universe, where true probabilities can be assigned, rather than mere amplitudes, correspond to the classical realm. Others have argued that decoherence itself can be insucient for classical behavior.
It is striking that there appear to be two such separate accounts of the relation between the quantum and classical worlds, Feynman’s sum over histories in a smooth background space-time and decoherence. For an outsider, it is hard to believe that both can be correct unless there is some way to derive one from the other. I will explore one such possibility below. In particular, I will explore the possibility that decoherence of quantum geometries is primary and might yield a smooth space-time in which Feynman’s account is secondarily correct.
An Outsider’s Doubts
I turn next to an outsider’s grounds for doubts about some of the core propositions of quantum mechanics. Roland Omnes, in The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, is at pains to argue that decoherence is the plausible route to classicity. In his discussion, two major points leap to attention. The first concerns the concept of an elementary predicate in quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics is stated in the framework of Hilbert spaces, which are finite or infinite-dimensional complex spaces, that is, spaces comprised of finite or infinite vectors of complex numbers. In eect, an elementary predicate is a measurement about an “observable” that returns a value drawn from some set of possible values. And so the first striking point is Omnes’ claim that all possible observables can be stated in Hilbert space. The second striking point is Omnes’ claim that some observables cannot be observed.
The first point is striking because it is not at all clear that all possible observables can be finitely stated in Hilbert space. My issue here is precisely the same as my issue with whether or not the configuration space of the biosphere is finitely prestatable. As I argued above, there does not seem to be a finite prestatement of all possible causal consequences of parts of organisms that may turn out to be useful adaptations in our or any biosphere, which arise by exaptation and are incorporated in the ongoing unfolding exploration of the adjacent possible by a biosphere.
In quantum mechanics, an observable corresponds to a mathematical operator that “projects out” the subspace of Hilbert space corresponding to the desired observable in a classical measurement context that allows detection of the presence or absence of the observable. But the biosphere is part of the physical universe, and the exapted wings of Gertrude the flying squirrel are manifestly observables, albeit classical observables. If we cannot finitely prestate the observable, “Gertrude’s wings,” then we cannot finitely prestate an operator on Hilbert space to detect the presence or absence of Gertrude’s wings. In short, there seems to be no way to prespecify either the quantum or classical variables that will become relevant to the physical evolution of the universe.
It turns out that the above issues may bear on the problem of time in general relativity, as Lee Smolin realized from our conversations and as I return to shortly.
Now, the second point. Omnes follows up on it. An observable requires a measuring device. There are some conceivable observables for which the measuring device would be so massive that it would, of itself, cause the formation of a black hole. Thus, no information resulting from the measurement could be communicated to the outside world beyond the black hole.
A strange situation; even if we could finitely prestate all possible observables, only some observables can manage to get themselves observed in the physical universe.
What shall we make of conceivable observables that cannot, in principle, be observed? More important, it seems to this outsider, is the following: If observation happens by coupling a quantum system to some other system, quantum or classical, whereby decoherence occurs and, in turn, classicity arises because loss of phase information precludes later reassembly of all the phase information to yield quantum interference, then there appears to be a relation between an observable being observed and the very decoherence by which something actual arises from the quantum amplitude haze.
If that is correct, then only those observables that can get themselves observed can, in principle, become actual. More, it begins to seem imperative to consider the specific possible pairs of quantum systems that can couple and decohere, for only thereby can such pairs become classical via decoherence. This begins to suggest preferred histories of the universe concerning such comeasuring pairs of quantum systems. Preferentially, those comeasuring pairs of quantum systems that decohere and become classical will tend to accumulate, due to the irreversibility of classicity. Thereafter quantum-classical pairs of systems that cause decoherence of the quantum system will preferentially accumulate into classicity.
If comeasuring yields classicity, and classicity is irreversible, the classical universe begins to appear to coconstruct itself. In particular, it is generally accepted that bigger systems, that is, systems with more coupled degrees of freedom, decohere more rapidly when they interact than smaller systems. If so, this begins to refine the suggestion of preferred histories of the universe concerning comeasuring pairs of quantum systems toward a preference for the emergence of classical diversity and complexity: If quantum systems with more coupled degrees of freedom irreversibly decohere more rapidly into classical behavior when they interact than smaller, simpler systems, then the kinetics of decoherence should persistently favor the irreversible accumulation of bigger, more complex quantum systems, rather than of smaller, simpler, quantum systems.
Chemistry should be an example. Molecules are quantum objects, yet flow into the chemical adjacent possible. The adjacent possible explodes ever more rapidly as molecular diversity, and hence molecular complexity, increases. Reactions of complex molecules are precise examples of the couplings of quantum systems whereby decoherence can happen. Decoherence presumably happens more rapidly among complex reacting molecules than among very simple molecules or the same total number of mere atoms, nucleons, and electrons in the same total volume. This hypothesis ought to be open to experimental test. If confirmed, the flow of possible quantum events into the chemical adjacent possible should, in part, be made irreversible by the decoherence of complex molecular species as they couple and react with one another.
If the general property obtains that complex quantum entities can couple to and interact with other complex quantum entities in more ways than can simple systems and that the number of ways of coupling explodes faster than the diversity of entities, and thus faster than the complexity of those quantum objects, then decoherence should tend to lead to favored pathways toward the accumulation of complex classical entities and processes. I return to these themes below.
The Problem of Time in General Relativity
To my delight, I soon found myself coauthor on a paper with Lee Smolin concerning the problem of time in general relativity. Lee had done the majority of the work, but had taken very seriously my concern that one cannot finitely prestate the configuration space of a biosphere.
In general relativity, space-time replaces space plus time. A history becomes a “world-line” in space-time. But that world-line is a geometrical object in spacetime. Time itself seems to disappear in general relativity, to be replaced by the geometrical world-line object in space-time.
But argued Lee, with my name appended, general relativity assumes that one can prestate the configuration space of a universe. In that prestated configuration space, a world-line is, indeed, merely a geometrical object. What if one cannot prestate the configuration space of the universe? If so, one cannot get started on Einstein’s enterprise, even if general relativity is otherwise correct. As concrete examples, Lee pointed out that four-dimensional manifolds are not classifiable.
How might one do physics without prestating the configuration space of the universe? Lee postulated use of spin networks, as described below, with the universe constructing itself from some initial spin network. In this picture, time and its passage is real. If there can be a framework in which time enters naturally, and possibly there is a natural flow of time, or an arrow of time preferentially from past to future, then, among other possible consequences, we may be able to break the matter-antimatter symmetry, for antimatter can be stated as the corresponding matter flowing backward in time. Break the symmetry of time in fundamental physics and you may buy for free the breaking of the symmetry between matter and antimatter. If time flows preferentially from past to future, matter dominates antimatter. That would be convenient since matter does dominate antimatter, and no one knows just why.
We will head in this direction.
Spin Networks
For the sixty years following and the emergence of matrix mechanics and the Schrödinger formulation of quantum mechanics, scant progress was made on quantum gravity. Now, in the past decade or so, there are two alternative approaches, string theory and spin networks. Of the two, string theory has captured the greatest attention. I discuss it briefly below.
Spin networks were invented by Roger Penrose three decades ago as a framework to think about a quantized geometry. Quite astonishingly, spin networks appear to have emerged from a direct attempt to quantize general relativity by Carlo Rovelli and Lee Smolin. In outline, part of the tension between quantum mechanics and general relativity lies in the very linearity of quantum mechanics and the deep nonlinearity of general relativity.
Building on work of Astekar and his colleagues, Rovelli and Smolin proceeded directly from general relativity along somewhat familiar pathways of canonical quantization. In outline, general relativity is based on a metric tensor concerning space-time. The metric tensor is a x symmetric tensor. It turns out that this tensor yields seven constraint equations. The solutions of six of the seven have turned out to be spin networks. The solution of the seventh equation would yield the Hamiltonian function, hence the temporal unfolding, of spin networks in a space x time quantum gravity.
Spin network theories can be constructed in dierent dimensions. The two most familiar are for two spatial and one temporal or three spatial and one temporal dimension. We will concern ourselves with three plus one spin networks for concreteness. The minimal objects in a spin network are discrete combinatorial objects that constitute first a tetrahedron, with four vertices and four triangular faces. A tetrahedron represents a primitive discrete unit of geometry, or space. Integer-valued labels are present on the edges and vertices of these tetrahedra. The labels on the edges represent spin states. The labels on the vertices represent “intertwinors” and concern how edges entering a vertex are connected to one another into and out of the vertex.
Analytic work has associated an area with a face of a tetrahedron and a volume with its volume. There is, at present, no way to represent the length of an edge connecting vertices. On the other hand, one can think of the integer values on the edges around a face of a tetrahedron as associated with the area of the tetrahedron, such that larger integers correspond to larger areas.
A geometry is built up by minimal moves, called “Pachner moves,” in which a given tetrahedron can give rise to daughter tetrahedra o each face. In addition, several tetrahedra can collapse to a single tetrahedron.
Thus we may picture an initial spin network, say, a single tetrahedron. In analogy with chemistry and combinatorial objects, the founder set of a chemical reaction graph, and the adjacent possible in the chemical reaction graph, we may consider the single initial tetrahedron as a founder set, gamma . Consider next all possible adjacent spin networks constructible in any single Pachner move. Let these first adjacent possible spin networks lie in an adjacent ring, gamma . In turn, consider all the spin networks constructible for the first time from the founder set in two Pachner moves, hence constructible for the first time in one Pachner move from the gamma- set of spin networks. Let this new set be the gamma- set of spin networks.
By iteration, we can construct a graph connecting the founder spin network with its -Pachner move “descendants,” -Pachner move descendints,   .   .   .   N-Pachner move descendents.
Each spin network in each gamma ring represents a specific geometry, subject to the constraint that two spin network tetrahedra that share one triangular face must assign the same spin labels to the common edges, hence, the same area to the common face.
Changes in the values of spins on the edges that change the areas and volumes of the tetrahedra can be thought of as deforming the geometry so that it warps in dierent ways. However, it should be stressed that there is no continuous background space or space-time in this discrete picture. Geometry is nothing but a spin network, and a change in geometry is nothing but a change in the tetrahedral structure of the spin network by adding or deleting tetrahedra or by changing the spin values on the edges of tetrahedra.
Within quantum mechanics, there is an appropriate way to consider the discrete analogue of Schrödinger’s equation, namely a means over time of evolving amplitudes from an initial distribution. In particular, the appropriate means of evolving amplitudes concern what are called “fundamental amplitudes,” which specify initial and final values of the integer values on edges before and after Pachner moves.
Consider a given graph linking spin networks from an initial tetrahedron in gamma , outward as in a mandala, to all daughter networks in gamma , gamma ,   .   .   .   gamma N, where N can grow large without limit.
The Emergence of a Large-Scale Classical Limit?
I now describe one approach to thinking about quantum gravity and the emergence of a smooth large-scale geometry based on this mandala and on Feynman’s idea of a sum over all histories. Endow the spin networks throughout with the same fundamental amplitudes, thus, the same law propagating amplitudes applies everywhere in the spin network mandala. Begin with all amplitude concentrated in the initial spin network tetrahedron in gamma . In this vision, a unit of time elapsing is associated with a Pachner move, such as a move from gamma to a point in gamma . With analogy to Feynman’s sum over all possible histories, consider the set of all pathways that begin at the initial tetrahedron in gamma and end on a given specific spin network N time steps later, for N = . That final spin network might lie in the gamma- ring, the gamma- ring, the gamma- ring, or any ring out to the gamma-N ring.
Here is a hopeful intuition that may prove true. If we consider the family of all histories beginning on gamma and ending in a specific spin network in the gamma N = ring, those pathways must be very similar and few in number. By contrast, if we consider all pathways length that begin on the gamma- tetrahedron and end, steps later, on a specific spin network in the gamma- ring after wandering all over the spin network mandala graph, there may be many such pathways, and they can be very dissimilar. Now, during the amplitude propagation along any pathway, an action can be associated with each Pachner move, hence, we can, with Feynman, think about the constructive or destructive interference among the family of pathways steps long that begin on the gamma- tetrahedron and end on any specific spin network. Then the hopeful intuition is that those pathways that begin on gamma and end on a spin network member of the gamma N = ring in Pachner moves will have very nearly the same action, hence, show strong constructive interference. By contrast, those pathways that begin on the gamma- tetrahedron and end, Pachner moves later, on a specific spin network in the gamma- ring will have very dierent actions, hence, show strongly destructive interference.
If the constructive interference among the few pathways to ring N overwhelms any residual constructive interference in the inner rings  such as ring , due to the larger number of pathways from gamma to gamma   then the hopeful concept is that amplitude will tend to accumulate in the gamma-N ring. Then (goes the hope shared with Smolin) the neighboring spin networks in the gamma-N shell constitute nearly the same geometry and nearly the same action in the sum of histories reaching them, which begins to suggest that a smooth large-scale geometry might emerge.
For this line of theory to succeed, it is not actually necessary that amplitude preferentially accumulate in the outermost, gamma-N, ring. Rather it is necessary as N increases that there be some ring, M, where M is less than N but increases monotonically with N, such that a suciently large number of alternative pathways with suciently similar phase end on members of the M ring that constructive interference is maximum for members of the M ring. Further, it is necessary that as N increases and M increases, amplitude continue to accumulate on the Mth ring.
In short, the concept is that, via constructive and destructive interference as amplitudes propagate in the mandala, some large-scale smooth geometry will pile up amplitude, hence probability, and a smooth classical geometry will emerge. Here is at least one image of how a large-scale smooth geometry might emerge from spin networks and constructive interference.
At least three major caveats are required. First, no calculation has yet been carried out for such a model, so such a theory may not work. Second, Feynman’s sum over histories assumes a classical continuous space and time. It may be entirely invalid to attempt to use a sum over histories argument in this quantum geometry setting. Third, assuming we can use Feynman’s sum over histories, we still have possible quantum geometries, not an actual geometry.
Self-Selection of the Laws and Constants of Nature?
Recall the puzzle, nay, the deep mystery, about what processes, if any, might have “chosen” the twenty constants in the standard model such that the universe happens, improbably, to be complex. To answer this deep mystery we have, at present, the anthropic principle, Lee Smolin’s concept of cosmic natural selection for black hole density, and the hope to find the ultimate parameter-free theory that would not require multiple universes or a historical process.
With caveats, I now briefly describe a way that may be useful to begin to think about the emergence of the constants such that any universe would have a given set of constants.
Tuning the constants corresponds to tuning the laws of physics. Is there a way to imagine a self-tuning of a universe to pick the appropriate values of its constants, to tune its own laws? I think the answer may be yes. And if the following is wrong in detail, the pattern of thought may prove useful.
In the spin network mandala picture, a J symbol, present throughout the spin networks in the mandala, generates an analogue of Schrödinger’s equation, hence, the means to propagate amplitudes in the graph of spin networks. Thus, a change in a J symbol would correspond to changing the laws of physics about how amplitudes propagate.
Importantly, the fundamental amplitudes are an ordered listing of integers, hence, there is a family of all possible fundamental amplitudes. Since each fundamental amplitude can be thought of as the “law” about propagating amplitudes among spin networks, Louis Crane pointed out that there is an infinite family of all possible laws to propagate amplitude among spin networks.
Thus, imagine an infinite stack of our spin network mandalas, in which each manadala is a graph from gamma , the tetrahedron, outward to gamma N, for N allowed to be arbitrarily large, of spin networks reachable in N steps by Pachner moves. The mandala members of the infinite stack of mandalas dier from one another only in the fundamental amplitudes, hence laws, that apply to each mandala. (I concede it may be necessary to have a means to encode in each manadala the given fundamental amplitudes that apply to that manadala.)
Now consider how amplitudes propagate in each mandala from an initial state with all the amplitudes concentrated in the gamma- tetrahedron. And consider any two mandalas whose fundamental amplitudes are minimally dierent. For some such adjacent mandalas with adjacent laws, the small change in the law may lead to a large change in how amplitudes propagate in the mandalas. For other pairs with minimal changes in the fundamental amplitudes or law, the way the amplitude propagates throughout the mandala may be very slight. Assuming this is true, one intuitively imagines that the total system is spontaneously drawn to those tuned values of the fundamental amplitude laws, where small changes in the laws make minimal changes in how amplitudes propagate.
A simple possible mechanism might accomplish this. Imagine a sum of histories from an initial gamma- tetrahedron in a mandala with some given fundamental amplitude laws (thereby the initial and boundary conditions are specified), where the pathways in that set of histories pass up and down the stack of mandalas such that the fundamental amplitude laws change, as does the spin network, and then consider the bundle of all such histories that end on a given spin network in a given gamma ring with given, perhaps new, fundamental amplitude laws. In eect, this conceptual move allows there to be quantum uncertainty not only with respect to spin networks along histories, but also quantum uncertainty with respect to the law by which amplitude propagates.
Then one can imagine a sum over all histories that, by constructive interference alone, picks those pathways, hence fundamental amplitude laws, that minimize the change in the ways amplitudes propagate. Such pathways would have similar phase, hence, accumulate amplitude by constructive interference. Then, by mere constructive interference, one can hope that such a process would pick out not only the history, but also tune the law to the well-chosen fundamental amplitudes laws that maximized constructive interference. Hopefully, that constructive interference would pick out smooth large-scale geometries like classical flat or near flat space. In such a large-scale classical-like space and time, Feynman’s familiar sum over histories that minimizes a least action along classical trajectories would emerge as a consequence.
Smolin and I discuss this possibility in a second paper. I find the idea attractive as a research program because it oers a way in which a known process, constructive interference, modified to act over a space of geometries and laws simultaneously, chooses the law. It is, of course, rather radical to suppose that there is quantum uncertainty in the law, but it does not seem obviously impossible.
On an even grander scale, particle physicists build the standard model from an abstract algebra called SU() x SU() x U(). One can imagine a similar research program that by constructive interference alone picks out the particles, constants, and laws of the standard model. Presumably, particles governed by suciently “nearby” laws would be able to interact, hence undergo constructive or destructive interference, thus picking the particles and the laws simultaneously.
There is a further interesting feature, for we appear to have in our mandala, or mandalas, a new arrow of time. Allow that at any step, any Pachner move can happen. Some moves add tetrahedra. A equal number delete tetrahedra. Yet the number of spin networks in ring N + is larger than the number of spin networks in ring N. Statistically, there are more ways to advance into ring N + than to retreat from ring N into ring N - . Other things equal, amplitude should tend to propagate outward from the gamma- tetrahedron. There is an analogy in chemical reaction graphs to the adjacent possible and the real chemical potential across the frontier from the actual to the adjacent possible.
But if so, time enters asymmetrically due to the graph structure of the spin network mandala. Then, statistically, time tends to flow in one direction, from simpler toward more complex spin networks into the ever-expanding adjacent possible.
A Brief Comment on String Theory
String theory has gained very substantial attention as a potential “theory of everything,” namely, a theory that might link all four forces and all the particles of the standard model into a single coherent framework. I do not write with even modest expertise on the subject. Nevertheless, it is possible that the concept of the law selecting itself via maximum constructive interference in a sum over all possible histories in a space of both spin networks and laws might possibly have relevance to string theory. The description of string theory that I give draws heavily on Brian Greene’s The Elegant Universe.
As is known qualitatively by many outside the confines of the physics community, string theory began by giving up the picture of fundamental particles as zero-dimensional, point particles. In its initial version, in the place of point particles, string theory posited one-dimensional strings that might be open, with two ends, or closed loops, with no free ends. Among the fundamental ideas of string theory is the idea that the dierent particles and the dierent forces can all be thought of as dierent modes of vibration of such strings. Because strings have finite length, string theory can hope to overcome the infinities that emerge when attempts are made to marry point particle quantum theories with general relativity in a continuous space-time. In eect, the finite length of the strings prevents consideration of space becoming infinitely curved at a point. Thus, string theory can dream of uniting quantum mechanics and general relativity, and it has, in fact, produced the entity carrying the gravitational force, the graviton, in a natural way.
Current string theory has gone beyond single-dimensional strings, and now considers two-or-higher-dimensional entities called M-branes. The rough present state of the art has shown that there are at least five one-dimensional string theories and M-brane theory. All of these theories appear to be linked as cousins of one another via various dualities among the theories.
String theories posit either eleven-or-fewer-dimensional space and time, with three of the spatial dimensions unfurled and large scale, corresponding to our familiar three-dimensional space. The remaining dimensions are imagined as curled up on the Planck length scale in what are called “Calabi-Yau” spaces, or more generally, compactified moduli. Compactification of an eleven-dimensional space and time can be thought of as a large-scale three-dimensional space and time, but with the additional dimensions curled up at each point in the large-scale three-dimensional space.
Calabi-Yau spaces can have dierent topologies. Consider as an analogy a long thin tube with two ends and a one-hole torus, like a donut. These two are topologically dierent. As a consequence, closed one-dimensional string loops can “live” on these surfaces in dierent ways. Thus, if you think of a string as a closed loop, that loop might live on the long tube in two ways, either wrapped around the tube one or more times or not wrapped around the tube, but lying on the tube’s surface like a rubber band lying on a surface. By contrast, consider the torus. The closed string might wrap around the torus in either of two ways, through the hole or around the torus. In addition, the string loop might live on the surface of the torus without wrapping either dimension. Each of these dierent ways of being on the tube or torus and the corresponding modes of vibration constitute dierent particles and forces. Calabi-Yau spaces are more complex than the tube or torus, but the basic consequences are the same. Dierent Calabi-Yau spaces, or more generally, dierent compactified moduli, with dierent kinds of holes around which strings can wrap zero, one, or more times correspond to dierent laws of physics with dierent particles and forces.
Physicists have shown, furthermore, that one Calabi-Yau space can smoothly deform into another with a “gentle” tearing of space and time. Hence, the laws, forces, and particles can deform into one another in a space of laws, forces, and particles. Within current string theory, it appears that it is still not certain that there exists a Calabi-Yau space whose string or M-brane inhabitants would actually correspond to the known particles and forces, but hopes are high.
However, even if there is a Calabi-Yau space whose strings and M-branes do correspond to our known particles and forces, string theorists have the diculty that it is not clear how the current universe happens to choose the correct Calabi-Yau space. The familiar ideas on this subject include the existence of a multiverse and the weak anthropic principle. For example, one could imagine Lee Smolin’s arguments for choices of Calabi-Yau spaces that lead to fecund universes with a near maximum of black holes, which are the birthplaces of still further universes.
The parallel between spin networks with dierent fundamental amplitude laws and the family of string and M-brane theories that can deform into one another is that in both theories we confront a family of theories having the property that dierent members of the family correspond to dierent particles, forces, and laws. In both cases, physicists do not at present have a theory to account for how, in this embarrassment of riches, our universe happens to pick the correct laws. I therefore make the suggestion that the same pattern of reasoning that I described above, a sum over histories of trajectories that vary both in configurations and in the laws, which maximizes constructive interference, might prove a useful approach. In the string theory context, one would consider a hyperspace of Calabi-Yau spaces, in which neighboring Calabi-Yau spaces would propagate amplitudes from the same initial condition in dierent ways. Presumably, somewhere in the hyperspace of Calabi-Yau spaces, small changes in Calabi-Yau spaces would yield small changes in how amplitudes propagate. For other locations in the hyperspace of Calabi-Yau spaces, small changes in the Calabi-Yau space would yield large dierences in how amplitudes propagate. In the hyperspace of Calabi-Yau spaces, where one Calabi-Yau space can deform into its neighbors, it should be possible to construct a sum over all histories of trajectories between an initial and final state in the same or dierent Calabi-Yau space, then seek such sums over histories that maximize constructive interference. The hope is that maximizing constructive interferences would pick out the Calabi-Yau space corresponding to our particles and forces. Presumably, this would occur in the region of the hyperspace of Calabi-Yau spaces, where small changes in the Calabi-Yau space yield the smallest changes in how amplitudes propagate. In short, maximization of constructive interference may be a useful principle to consider to understand how the universe chooses its laws.
String theorists recognize the need to confront further major problems. Most notably, string theory posits a background space-time in which strings and M-branes vibrate. But if string theory is to be the theory of everything, including space and time, then space and time cannot be assumed as a backdrop. Thus, a virtue of spin networks is that it aords the hope of a quantized geometry from the outset. On the other hand, particles and the three nongravitational forces have yet to be incorporated into a spin network picture.
A Decoherence Spin Network Approach to Quantum Gravity
However the universe picks its presumably quantum laws, somehow the classical realm emerges. I noted above that current theory sees two approaches to linking the quantum and classical realms. The first is based on Feynman’s sum over histories, but as a perturbative theory assumes a continuous background space-time and does not get rid of the linear superposition of possibilities that is the core of quantum mechanics and interference.
What of the second approach, decoherence? The reality of decoherence is established. If one is to take decoherence seriously, and also to consider geometry constructing itself, then presumably decoherence can apply to geometry as it constructs itself. What would it mean to apply decoherence to quantum gravity itself, to the vacuum, to geometry itself?
Well, to an outsider, the following seems possible. If we are to conceive of an initial spin network, say a tetrahedron, and all possible daughter spin networks, as well as all their possible daughter spin networks, propagating amplitudes on the mandala, then at any moment N steps away from moment , more than one geometry is possible  namely all those reachable in N Pachner moves.
We seem to confront the same problem we confront with quantum systems coupling to quantum systems, such as electrons coupling to organic molecules, or to classical systems, such as rocks. These quantum systems can decohere. Can quantum geometries become coupled with one another or dierent parts of one quantum geometry become coupled, so to speak, and decohere?
Why not try the idea?
I now discuss one possible approach to this issue. The approach posits a quantum of action, h, to the generation of a tetrahedron, hence a Planck energy and thus a Planck mass to a tetrahedron, and decoherence setting in at a sucient mass and size scale.
By use of an equation suggested by Zurek relating the decoherence timescale, Td, to the relaxation timescale, Tr, of the system, in which increasing mass and area increase the rate of decoherence in proportion to their product, it can be qualitatively shown (via suciently rough arguments) that geometry may well be thought of as decohering, and doing so on a length scale of about cm, which is smaller than the Compton radius of the electron and even smaller than the radius of a nucleus.
Now, there are some interesting features of this rough calculation. First, if we begin with an initial tetrahedron of geometry, it can have four daughter tetrahedra. In turn, each daughter tetrahedron can have two or more daughter tetrahedra, hence, the initial spin network can grow exponentially in the number of tetrahedra before decoherence sets in. This is a clue that a purely quantum account might be given of an initial exponential expansion of a universe starting with a single tetrahedron. Thus, it might be possible to do without the “inflationary hypothesis” of exponential expansion of a classical space in the early moments after the big bang.
Second, an initial exponential expansion of geometry might overcome, as the inflationary hypothesis does, the particle-horizon problem in cosmology, in which we confront the puzzle of why parts of the universe that have been out of apparent causal contact since the big bang can be so similar. If the initial expansion is exponential, then slows to linear, as in the inflationary hypothesis or perhaps in this purely quantum approach, then the particle-horizon problem may disappear.
Third, a purely quantum exponential expansion over many orders of magnitude should presumably yield a flat power spectrum over many size scales for quantum fluctuations in the earliest small fraction of a second of the life of the universe prior to the end of this exponential expansion when decoherence of geometry occurs.
Fourth, we must consider when geometries decohere whether there may be geometries that are the slowest to decohere. If dierent parts of a single spin network geometry can become coupled, it is natural to assume that flat parts might decohere more slowly than distorted parts of that geometry. Intuitively, phase information can get lost more readily when two lumpy parts of a geometry couple than when two flat parts of a geometry couple. Of course, an explicit model exploring this is badly needed and entirely missing, but in its absence, let’s make the assumption. Given that, then an initial exponential explosion of flat and warped geometry occurs until decoherence sets in on a length scale of something like cm. At this point, flat geometry “wins” because it decoheres most slowly. Hence, as soon as decoherence of geometry sets in, space tends to be flat in the absence of matter.
But even after decoherence sets in, geometry is busy all the time trying to build geometry exponentially and everywhere, while simultaneously decohering. Now an interesting feature of the Td/Tr equation alluded to above is that whatever the exponential rate of expansion of geometry may be per Planck time unit, the exponential rate of decoherence, Td, which grows as the mass times the size scale squared of the geometry, increases, until eventually the exponential rate of formation and exponential rate of decoherence of geometry must balance. The exponential expansion of the universe is over. However, linear expansion by construction of geometry can continue. The fastest linear construction of geometry from any tetrahedron would be at the speed of light.
When the rate of geometry formation and decoherence balance, geometry keeps building tetrahedra as fast as possible everywhere, but flat geometry, by hypothesis, decoheres most slowly. In the limit, perhaps flat geometries do not decohere at all. Then, the geometry of the universe tends to be flat in the absence of matter, as Einstein requires in general relativity. And, once again, the flatness after exponential expansion may overcome a need for the inflationary scenario and solve the particle-horizon problem.
It may be of interest that the assumption of an action, h, in the generation of each tetrahedron implies an expanding total energy in geometry itself, the vacuum itself, as geometry constructs itself. Indeed, one expects that the assumption of an action, h, per tetrahedron would lead to a uniform energy density, a constant scalar quantity even as geometry grows. Such an energy could be related to the cosmological constant.
It may also be of interest that string theory posits “extra dimensions” that “curl up” on themselves to yield four-dimensional space-time. Could the decoherence of geometry aord a parallel way that extra dimensions can curl up? And could the ever-generating possible geometries, as they generate exponentially even as they decohere, yield sucient extra degrees of freedom to correspond to the modes of oscillation of strings or M-branes in six or seven extra dimensions?
It may be interesting that the energy content of geometry could be enormous compared to that of familiar particles of the same size scale. That might allow the familiar particles with rest mass to borrow a tiny bit of the vacuum energy for their mass. Such a possibility could hint that matter, energy, and geometry might be able to interconvert. Perhaps dierent particles would be dierent kinds of topological “knots” in the spin network structure of geometry with interconvertible particles being nearby knot topologies.
We are obviously far from anything like a coherent theory that implements any of the intuitions above. They remain at best mere suggestions for a research program.
Coconstructing Complexity?
I began this chapter wondering why the universe is complex. In place of the anthropic principle or Lee Smolin’s cosmic selection, I have suggested one possible approach to the choices of the constants of nature by maximizing constructive interference over a sum of all histories through a space of both configurations and laws. Even if that program were to succeed, it does not necessarily yield a complex universe, let alone one poised roughly between expansion and contraction.
Might we see ways to understand why the universe is complex? Perhaps, but merely perhaps. I return to the thoughts earlier in this chapter that decoherence requires coupling systems and the loss of phase information. If, in general, complex and high-diversity quantum systems with many coupled degrees of freedom lose phase information when they interact more rapidly than an equal number of simple, low-diversity quantum systems with the same total number of interacting parts, then the comeasuring of entangled quantum systems should tend toward higher complexity, diversity, and classicity. In short, complexity and diversity would beget classicity irreversibly. In turn, this would lead to a preferred tendency toward a lock-in of complexity and diversity. There is a sense in which classical objects are like the constraints on the release of energy that permits work to be done. Classical objects, interacting with quantum objects, lead to decoherence and more classicity. Complex pairs of quantum objects that decohere readily, or classical objects and those quantum objects that are caused to decohere readily when interacting with the classical object, form preferred pairs that tend to decohere, hence become frozen into classicity. We begin to have an image of preferred pairs of quantum systems coupling and decohering, hence, an image of a complex and diverse universe constructing itself as it nonergodically invades the adjacent possible, rather as a biosphere constructs itself. And if more complexity and diversity means more comeasurement and faster decoherence of a wider variety of complex quantum systems, in analogy with the concept that extracting work from increasingly subtle nonequilibrium systems requires increasingly subtle measuring and coupling devices, the universe as a whole may persistently break symmetries as new entities come into existence, and hence expand its diversity, complexity, and classicity as fast as possible.
Loose arguments? Yes. Testable? Here and there. Wrong? Probably. Deeply wrong? Maybe not. Does this get the universe to the edge of expansion versus contraction or to a flat universe expanding forever more rapidly? I would love it to be so. Indeed, I would love a view in which matter, energy, and geometry can all interconvert. After all, if geometry, the vacuum, has energy, such interconversion does not seem impossible. Do the considerations of this chapter require detailed models and supporting calculations to be taken as more than the merest suggestions? Absolutely. This chapter, like much of Investigations, is protoscience. But science grows from serious protoscience, and I take Investigations to be serious protoscience.
We enter a new millennium. There will be time for new science to grow.











the look of architecture






one
dressing up


Architecture is hard to define. Goethe called it music frozen in space, which, while it captures a sense of rhythm, is too one-dimensional. And it relegates the mother of the arts to an inferior position; just as well to describe music as melted architecture. Nietzsche believed that architecture reflected his pride, man’s triumph over gravity, and his will to power. This notion applies to many buildings, from Gothic cathedrals to skyscrapers, but it is too, well, Nietzschean. The British master Edwin Lutyens referred to architecture as a sort of play: “In architecture, Palladio is the game!” Le Corbusier described his art as “the masterly, correct and magnificent play of masses brought together in light,” which is a good description of one of his own buildings. I am partial to Sir Henry Wotton’s definition. Wotton, who lived a long time in Venice and was a lover of architecture though not an architect, published a treatise on the subject in 1642. “In Architecture, as in all other Operative Arts, the end must direct the Operation,” he wrote. “The end is to build well. Well-building hath three conditions: Commoditie, Firmeness, and Delight.”
Sir Henry’s description, which was based on the writings of the Roman architect Vitruvius, appeals to me because it emphasizes the complexity of the building art. To begin with, architecture has not one but three distinct purposes: to shelter human activity (commodity), to durably challenge gravity and the elements (firmness), and to be an object of beauty (delight). Architecture is always a synthesis of the three. However, the fulfillment of one purpose does not guarantee the satisfaction of the others. There are homely sturdy buildings and beautiful flimsy ones. A well-planned building can be ugly just as a beautiful building can function poorly. Form does not, contrary to Louis Sullivan’s hoary maxim, follow function.
Not only are function and form separate, over their long lives buildings can successfully accommodate a variety of uses. For example, some of the most famous museums (the Louvre, the Hermitage, the Belvedere) started life as royal palaces; the Uffizi in Florence is so named because it originally housed offices; and the Prado in Madrid was designed to be a museum of science, not art. The acclaimed Musée d’Orsay in Paris is housed in a railroad station. Two of my favorite small museums, the Frick Collection in New York City and the Phillips Collection in Washington, D.C., were built as residences. As historic preservation and adaptive reuse demonstrate, you can shop in a renovated warehouse, do office work in a converted loft, or live in a barn. Assuming, of course, that the warehouse, the loft, and the barn were well built. The material fabric of old buildings—the heavy beams, rough brick walls, and solid woodwork—is one of their chief pleasures. That is why we feel cheated by hollow walls, flimsy doors, and shaky balustrades. Buildings should last and feel as though they will.
One might assume that just as the highest-rated cars—Mercedes-Benz, BMW, Lexus—represent the highest standards of automobile technology, the most admired architecture would be the best built. This was generally true in the past, but in the twentieth century, when new materials and new aesthetic theories often have driven architects to cavalier experimentation, even celebrated architects have fallen short in that department. Le Corbusier’s white suburban villas, for example, were crudely finished in cement plaster on top of brick, and since the architect usually ignored (for aesthetic reasons) intrusive metal flashing and coping strips, the crude “machines for living” often aged poorly. Some Frank Lloyd Wright buildings have leaky skylights, sagging overhangs, and defective heating systems. This does not make them any less delightful to visit, but it must make them considerably less delightful to inhabit. Perhaps the most dramatic example of failed experimentation in recent years is the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris, which opened in 1977. The building was widely praised for its architectural innovation—the British periodical Architectural Design called it “a seminal building of the Modern Movement.” The architects Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers turned the building literally inside-out. They dramatically hung pipes, ducts, fire stairs, elevators, and escalators from the exterior structure. These previously hidden elements were now exposed in plain sight—and exposed to the elements. The result might have been foreseen: after only twenty years, the French government was obliged to close the building for a two-year renovation. Although the authorities maintained that the renovation was required because of the unexpectedly large number of visitors, according to Le Monde almost half of the $90 million budget was spent on refurbishing the façade.
The University of Pennsylvania, where I teach, is the site of Louis I. Kahn’s A. N. Richards Medical Research Laboratory. This structural tour-de-force of precast concrete and brick brought its designer international acclaim. I remember traveling from Montreal to Philadelphia as a student to see the building a few years after it was built. My classmates and I particularly admired the exposed concrete structure and the explicit separation of what Kahn called “servant” and “served” spaces—massive brick ventilation shafts and delicate, glass-enclosed individual laboratories. However, The latter proved to be unpopular with their occupants. The large windows let in too much light (today, most are papered over with aluminum foil), cement dust from the exposed concrete beams falls on the lab tables, and the rigid plan has proved inflexible to changing needs.
The Richards Laboratory was built only 35 years ago. It is next to a student dormitory known as the Quad, a picturesque Jacobean Revival complex planned around a series of courtyards. This handsome building has been doing yeoman service for almost a century. The Quad was designed by the Philadelphia firm of Walter Cope and John Stewardson, whose work at the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton, and Bryn Mawr was largely responsible for the popularity of so-called Collegiate Gothic. Pleasing, well-loved—and well-built—the Quad is architecture of the highest order. Yet my classmates and I did not pay any attention to the dormitory when we visited Philadelphia years ago. We had never heard of Cope & Stewardson, despite their achievements and wide cultural influence. The architecture historians whom we studied—Siegfried Giedion, Nikolaus Pevsner, James Marston Fitch—favored innovators and experimenters, even if the innovations and experiments often failed. Put another way, most historians of modern architecture gave precedence to Delight over Commoditie and Firmeness. This may be because the appearance of a building was easier to assess (especially at a distance) than either its functional performance or material durability. Or maybe they were attracted chiefly to the aesthetic qualities of architecture. In any case, “imaginative, inventive, and revolutionary” were more likely accolades to be showered on important buildings than “accommodating, dependable, and sound.”
This is not to say that good architecture is merely utilitarian. One of the grandest spaces in Philadelphia is the concourse of Thirtieth Street Station, which was built in 1934 for the Pennsylvania Railroad by the accomplished Chicago architects Graham, Anderson, Probst & White, the successor firm of Daniel H. Burnham. The magnificent room, 290 feet long and almost 100 feet high, is covered by a flat coffered ceiling decorated in red, gold, and cream. Diffused light streams in from tall windows on both sides. Almost nothing in this memorable space—the gilded Art Deco chandeliers, the travertine walls, the massive Corinthian columns at each end—was a product of its rather mundane function: to provide a waiting space for people, before they descended the staircases that led to the platforms below. But the railroad station concourse in the heyday of railroad travel, was more than merely a place to get on and off trains. It was a gateway to the city, as well as a symbol of unreserved faith in modern transportation—and in the Pennsylvania Railroad. That is why it was appropriate for delight to take precedence over commodity.
Yet delight is not uniform. The Main Concourse of Grand Central Terminal in New York City, for example, offers different pleasures than Thirtieth Street Station. The monumental spaces are comparable in size and function. They are both well built. Similar spaces, similar materials, yet the experience of the two concourses is different. Both buildings are inspired by the Classical architecture of the past, but Grand Central, which opened in 1913, is a modified version of Beaux-Arts Classicism, whereas the Philadelphia station, despite the Corinthian columns, is simplified, abstracted, and stylized, what historians called “stripped Classicism.” As a result, Grand Central is dramatic, visually rich in its details, almost Wagnerian; Thirtieth Street is equally dramatic but in a way that is coolly geometrical and sleekly urbane—not Wagner, Cole Porter. Style is evident in the smallest details. It ensures a continuity between the great vaulted sky of Grand Central and the ticket counters, or between the Thirtieth Street chandeliers and the announcement boards at each track stair. It is the visual language of a building. Architectural style is the manner in which the architect communicates a particular kind of visual delight, in large ways and small.
Commodity, firmness, and delight are never evenly weighted. Sometimes one predominates, sometimes the other. Sometimes a waiting room needs to be a triumphal celebration of arrival and departure—sometimes it is just a waiting room. Sometimes it is necessary to compromise structural simplicity to achieve an esthetic effect. Sometimes functional requirements override other considerations; a laboratory that does not serve its scientists is a failed work of architecture, no matter how beautiful its design. A banal church is a greater failure than a banal factory. The art of building requires judiciously balancing Wotton’s three conditions.
The end must direct the operation. That is what distinguishes architecture from the fine arts of painting and sculpture “An artist can paint square wheels,” Paul Klee once observed, “but an architect must make them round.” Architecture, in this respect, is no different than other “operative arts” such as cooking. The creativity of the chef is likewise circumscribed by factors outside his control—the natural ingredients, the human palate, the chemistry of foods. The dish must be at once nourishing (commodity), cookable (firmness), and, of course, tasty (delight). (It should also look good, although the contemporary trend toward visually extravagant dishes seems to me an aberration). The art of cooking, like the art of architecture, lies in knowing how to establish the appropriate relations between the three conditions.

The experience of food is sensual. It is also first-hand. That is, while it’s fun to read recipes and look at photographs of table settings in Gourmet magazine, no one I know considers this a substitute for eating. The experience of buildings is sensual, too. Yet, many of us get our first glimpses of buildings—particularly celebrated buildings—as images in books, magazines, newspapers, public lectures, and exhibitions. One of the most famous buildings of the Modern movement, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe’s Barcelona Pavilion, was known almost entirely through photographs since it was built for an exhibition that lasted only seven months. Before photography, the Paimio Tubercolosis Sanatorium, located in a remote part of Finland, would have remained obscure; as it was, its stunning images brought the young Alvar Aalto worldwide recognition. The Sydney Opera House is another world-famous building that, at least outside Australia, relatively few people have seen first-hand. Yet photography tells us very little about how a building fulfills its function, or about how it is built. For example, the handrails in the often-photographed stairway of the Paimio sanatorium look like standard International Style metal pipes. In fact they are wood—much more pleasant to the touch—painted to look like metal. Well-known photographs of the Barcelona Pavilion show eight free-standing columns supporting a flat slab, and free-standing marble screens that carry no loads, a prototypical International Style structure. In reality, there are columns concealed within the screens, which are not slabs of marble but thin marble sheets attached to a masonry back-up wall. In other words, this 1929 building is an example of traditional layered construction, not of modernistic structural purism.1
In photographs, buildings are forever young. The ravages of time, weather, and use are banished. It is a shock to come across a revered architectural icon and to find the concrete stained, the painted window frames chipped, the tiles cracked. Of course, all buildings age, but some age more gracefully than others. A 450-year-old Palladio villa retains its beauty, despite peeling plaster and mossy stonework (perhaps it even looks more enchanting). Most modern buildings, on the other hand, lose their potency if they are not gleaming and machinelike.
Obviously, photography highlights the visual qualities of buildings and ignores commodity and firmness. Yet photography cannot completely communicate delight. A visitor to the Seagram Building in New York, for example, is surprised to discover the subtle relationship between Mies’ bronze tower and the Italian Renaissance façade of McKim, Mead & White’s Racquet and Tennis Club on the other side of Park Avenue. Equally deceptive are photographs of Frank Lloyd Wright’s work in Oak Park, since they give no hint of the comfortable suburban surroundings of his so-called prairie houses. As I student, I studied the buildings of Le Corbusier in black and white photographs, which did not prepare me for the shock of experiencing his often wildly polychrome interiors. Nor can photography communicate movement, which is such an integral part of the architectural experience (film is better at this, but not much). Nothing conveys the actual experience of a building like the real thing. To paraphrase Robert Hughes, a photograph of architecture is to architecture as telephone sex is to sex.
Never is modern architectural photography more misleading than in its portrayal of domestic interiors. Interiors are usually photographed empty or with minimal furnishings, before the owners have had the opportunity to move in and (presumably) defile the purity of the design. But even if the space is occupied, strict conventions prevail: furniture must be lined up just so; there must be no distractions, no half-empty tea cups, no crumpled newspapers, no abandoned children’s toys. Books on shelves are arranged to create interesting patterns, personal mementos are temporarily banished—everything must be neat. I once observed a photographer’s assistant during a photo shoot comb out the fringe of a rug. Such primping and visual editing sets off the architecture to best advantage. It also—not coincidentally—gives the impression that the designed interior is autonomous and self-contained: in other words, that it is a work of art. Markedly, these photographs never include human figures. People would be the greatest distraction of all.
The world of buildings depicted in books and magazines is a scaleless, self-sufficient place. The absence of people in architectural photographs has several effects. In the past, the proportions and dimensions of buildings were based on the human body. While this was done for philosophical reasons, it also ensured a direct relationship between architecture and people—it is why even very large Classical buildings feel comfortable. By removing people from buildings, architectural photography makes it possible to regard architecture as an abstraction, unrelated to humans. It is not merely that the conventions of modern architectural photography ideally communicate the intentions of most modern architects, it is also that they validate those intentions. People? Who needs them?
While I was writing Home, I discovered that the most useful historical sources for information about how people furnished and decorated their homes were often paintings. Not paintings in which the room was the subject, but portraits and domestic genre scenes. An example of the latter is James Tissot’s, “Hide and Seek,” which shows four little girls at play in a Victorian sitting room. The décor is exotic, an eclectic mixture of Persian rugs, Chinese porcelain pots, and tiger-skins and others furs scattered over the furniture.
Tissot was a French painter who settled in London in 1871. An easel in the corner suggests that this is his own house, in which case, the woman sunk deep into an easy chair, reading a newspaper may be his Irish mistress. John Singer Sargent’s masterpiece, “The Daughters of Edward Darley Boit,” painted in 1882, likewise shows four girls. Henry James described it as “the happy play-world of a family of charming children,” but the girls can hardly be said to be playing. Properly dressed in white pinafores, black socks, and patent leather shoes, they form a motionless tableau. The room, in an apartment in Paris, is stylishly bare, unadorned except for two immense Japanese vases and a red screen. The mood is entirely different in the Swedish painter Carl Larsson’s playful “Mother’s and the Cherubs’ Room,” which was included in Larsson’s famous book Ett Hem (At Home), published in 1899. The walls of his wife’s bedroom are wooden boards, whitewashed and decorated with a painted frieze of ribboned garlands; the ceiling, likewise wood, is painted green with red trim. The simple furniture is also painted in bright colors. Karin Larsson’s bed is separated from the children’s cots by a striped woven curtain. We see three of the Larsson girls in various stages of dress—and undress. That is appropriate, too, for naturalism and artlessness permeate this charming scene.
Such paintings are more faithful depictions of domestic surroundings than modern architectural photographs. For one thing, they are full of the signs of everyday life. A coat is thrown casually over a chair, there are crumbs on the table, Tissot’s little girl playing on the floor rumples the carpet. Moreover, in these interiors the architecture is in the background. It is a setting for human activity—just as it is in real life. Paintings also convey something about the atmosphere of the interior. Dutch seventeenth-century domestic paintings, for example, exude a prosperous air of bourgeois comfort and propriety. A hundred years later, François Boucher painted a middle-class French family gathering for morning coffee in a little room with japanned woodwork and gilded moldings. There is a sweet intimacy here that is absent in the Dutch interiors. An interior of the same period by Henry Walton shows an English gentleman at breakfast. He is sitting in a relaxed posture, wearing a riding-coat and boots, accompanied by his dog. The ambience is one of informal and relaxed country life.
As I studied such paintings, I started to see associations between the rooms and their inhabitants. The legs of the mahogany furniture in an English country house were as straight and unadorned as their owners’ riding boots. The arabesques and curlicues of the moldings and architectural ornaments in a French salon mirrored the flouncing ribbons that adorned the women’s dresses and the frills of the men’s shirts. The proper black broadcloth and white lace collars of the Dutch men and women echoed the spotless black-and-white checkerboard marble floors. I became convinced that a strong connection exists between the way that we decorate our homes and the way that we dress ourselves.
There are three distinct reasons for the intimate relationship between dress and décor. The first is technical. Décor, like dress, incorporates fabrics. Curtains, swags, and window-treatments are made of silk, damask, satin, brocade, wool, muslin, and velvet—so is clothing. Woven materials are used in tapestries, wall-hangings, carpets and upholstery as well as coats and skirts. Inevitably, the dressmaker’s techniques of embroidering, gathering, pleating, and trimming find their way into décor. This is why furniture skirts recall women’s skirts, and why the fringes, cords, and bobbins of nineteenth-century drapery recall ladies’ ballgowns. The delicate lace curtains and the billowing baldachin over a bed in a ladies’ boudoir matched the clothes in her dressing room.
The connection between décor and dress can be even more intimate, for architecture sometimes directly mimics dress. The garlands in eighteenth-century buildings are sculpted or painted versions of the sashes and flowered ornaments worn by men and women. The ancient Greeks incorporated elements of dress in temple architecture. This is most apparent in colonnades, which Vincent Scully has likened to hoplites massed in a phalanx.2 There is no doubt that Classical columns were given human attributes. Ancient authors likened the vertical flutes to the folds in a chiton, or tunic.3 Columns have capitals—that is, heads. The moldings of Doric capitals were sometimes painted to resemble headbands; Ionic and Corinthian capitals incorporated carved head garlands, and the curving tendrils of Corinthian capitals often look more like hair than foliage. Indeed, Vitruvius considered the Corinthian order “feminine,” as opposed to the sturdy masculine Doric. Sir Henry Wotton went so far as to call the Corinthian order “lascivious” and “decked like a wanton courtesan.”4
The second connection between dress and décor is social. In the 1890s, the famous English economist Alfred Marshall observed that as people earned more money, they wanted better food, better clothes and larger homes—both for social standing and comfort. Since homes and clothes are timeworn ways in which to convey status, there is a conformity in the types of materials and symbols used to convey social standing. If family coats of arms are displayed, they will be seen on wall medallions as well as on blazer buttons. If gold is treasured, the wealthy will wear gold braid and surround themselves with gilt moldings. If this is considered too flashy, other materials can convey status: stainless steel kitchen appliances and stainless steel watch bracelets. Diamonds may be forever, but fashions change. Today, leather is considered a luxury material, and is used both for expensive clothing and expensive sofas. A hundred years ago, leather was considered utilitarian; leather aprons and vests were worn only by workmen, and leather easy chairs were only found in smoking rooms and men’s clubs since leather was less flammable than fabric. But it was never used in salons or drawing rooms. When corduroy, originally used only in workingmen’s dress, became accepted by the middle class, it also showed up as upholstery. The current fashion for “natural” dress fabrics—cotton, wool, linen—has a counterpart in “natural” décor: exposed brick, oiled wood, polished concrete.
In a more general sense—and this has nothing to do with conspicuous consumption—both homes and clothes convey values. Carl Larsson’s home was a statement of both his and Karin’s naturalistic aesthetic ideals, so was James Tissot’s exotic sitting room. Whether or not we are artists, our homes, like our clothes, communicate who we are, or at least how we wish others to perceive us: starchly formal or comfortably casual, intensely avant-garde or resolutely traditional, bohemian or conservative, cosmopolitan or down-home. The Che Guevara poster on the wall and the embroidered denim jacket convey one set of values; Colonial break-fronts and penny loafers, another. That is why it is disconcerting if dress and décor are not in harmony. Sweat shirts and running shoes in a Louis Quinze drawing room send a decidedly mixed message, as does a three-piece suit on the deck of a Malibu beach bungalow.
The third connection between dress and décor concerns perception. Architecture, interior decoration, and fashion design are three distinct fields, yet we experience them with the same eye. Whether we look at dress or décor, we bring the same visual bias, the same sensibility, the same taste. This sensibility is not constant. Sometimes we appreciate simplicity, sometimes complexity. Fashionable seventeenth-century French eyes, for example, favored floral decorations and embroidery, and introduced the custom of having vases of fresh flowers in the home. English eyes in the midst of the Neoclassic revival sought fundamental simplicity and sobriety in men’s clothes as well as in architecture. Victorian eyes fancied dense patterns that were likely to show up in waistcoats and on wainscotting. Parisian eyes, in the early 1900s, admired the same neo-Empire motifs in dress and décor.*
Early twentieth-century eyes had their own particular sensibility. One of the great interiors of this period is the main living space of the Tugendhat House, designed by Mies Van der Rohe in 1928. The house stands outside Brno, Czechoslovakia. The exterior is a low-key International Style white box, but the interior is astonishing. The public rooms are contained in one large open space. A curved wall of macassar ebony defines the dining room, and a straight free-standing wall of onyx dorée separates the music room from the living room. The space is punctuated by slender cruciform columns covered in chromed metal. The east and south walls are floor-to-ceiling glass—a precursor of Mies’ famous glass house. The sense of openness is heightened when, at the touch of a button, fifteen-foot sections of the glass wall sink into the ground.
I have never seen the Tugendhat House, except in a handful of black-and-white photographs (the house was severely damaged during the Second World War). This is another case where photographs are a poor substitute. They do not convey the rich textures of the raw silk and velvet draperies, nor the vivid colors of the upholstery: emerald green leather and ruby-red velvet. Nor do they capture the sumptuous range of materials: onyx, pearwood, handwoven wool, chromed metal and (surprisingly) a linoleum floor. Since the surviving photographs do not show any human figures, they heighten the impression that the house was built yesterday, especially as the furniture, designed by the architect, is still in production.
Mies van der Rohe appears in a photograph taken in 1926. The place is Stuttgart, the site of the famous Weissenhof housing exhibition, which he planned, and where he brought together the leading exponents of the soon-to-be-christened International Style. One of these was Le Corbusier, who is also in the photograph. The two firebrands, who will soon set the architectural world on its ear, are deep in conversation. Le Corbusier smokes a pipe and sports a jaunty derby and a loose, short tweed coat. Mies, looking older than his forty years, wears a Homburg, a long dark ulster, and spats. This photograph puts the Tugendhat House in context. However “modern” the airy room appears to my eyes, it contained a considered and formal way of life that is as remote from me as waxed moustaches, Homburgs, and spats. It is in that context that Mies’ curious combination of ordered simplicity and sybaritic luxury must be understood.
Nothing could be less similar to the Tugendhat House than Charles Moore’s weekend house that he built for himself in the hills above Berkeley, California. I saw it in the summer of 1964, two years after it was built. While the Tugendhat House appears sexy and glamorous, the Moore house is at first glance downright rustic, a little barn, twenty-six feet square, capped by a saddle roof. It is an elegant little barn, however, with white-painted walls and large windows that open up the corners, not by disappearing into the ground but by sliding sideways like barn doors. The one-room interior contains a grand piano and a sunken bath that looks vaguely Roman, perhaps because the skylight above it is supported by four solid fir Tuscan columns (found by Moore at a demolition site). Four similar columns support a second skylight over a sitting area.
I admire the Tugendhat House, but I could not imagine living in it. That is, I could not imagine having to dress up sufficiently to feel at home. The Moore house, on the other hand, reflects a more compliant sensibility. Its floor-to-ceiling windows, spare detailing, and open interior mark it as a successor to the International Style. Yet the shingled roof and the Tuscan columns hearken back to older traditions. The little building manages to be comfortable, relaxed, archetypal, and vaguely ironic, all at the same time. The eclectic, Californian setting is both informal and formal. Put another way, it is a place where people who wear tweed jackets with jeans, or silk skirts with canvas espadrilles would fit right in.
The little Moore barn is an historic building. Together with Robert Venturi’s Vanna Venturi House, which was designed the same year, it marks the advent of an architectural style that became known as Postmodernism.5 One of the celebrated buildings of Postmodernism is James Stirling’s Neue Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart, which was completed in 1984. Stirling vastly expands Moore’s eclecticism, combining a bewildering mixture of forms; a Doric portico, a staid neoclassical wing that matches the existing museum, an Egyptian-looking curved cornice, a colorful Russian Constructivist entrance canopy, a curving steel-and-glass wall, and two huge blue ventilator funnels lifted straight from the Centre Georges Pompidou. The monumental façade of alternating bands of travertine and sandstone is undermined by oversized fiberglass handrails that look like pink sausages. I couldn’t understand this design, except as a tour-de-force, until I visited the building. It was a wintry Sunday, and the Staatsgalerie was packed—it is one of the most popular museums in Germany. Now the architecture made sense. This museum-cum-discotheque was the perfect setting for the eclectic crowd. We were wearing every type of dress imaginable: casual wear, business suits, ski parkas, work clothes. Some people dressed up for a Sunday visit to the museum, some dressed down. Stirling’s lively collage absorbed us all. I did not see any gentlemen in Homburgs and spats, but they would have fitted in, too.
A number of years ago I accompanied the architect Jack Diamond on a visit to a building that he had just completed at York University in Toronto. It was a student center, containing a food court and lounges on the main level and student organization offices on the second floor. The exterior of the building was decidedly traditional. Facing a landscaped common, the well-proportioned façade consisted of a colonnaded brick base supporting a row of double columns capped by a deep copper-lined cornice. Behind the colonnade, which was fitted with retractable glass panels that could be opened during warm weather, was a two-story-high hall lit by three large skylights. The exterior had a simplicity that reminded me of McKim, Mead & White, albeit without Classical ornament.
The interior was different, with many hallmarks of the International Style: no decoration, bare concrete, exposed structural beams, factory sash glazing and steel pipe railings. I assumed that the stark simplicity was the result of a restricted budget, and a desire to use materials that would withstand wear and tear. It seemed pretty banal to me, and although I didn’t say anything to Jack, I was disappointed. Yet as we walked around, I changed my mind. Although the décor was tough and unsentimental, it was not crude. There were sleek stainless-steel pendant lighting fixtures with suspended glass diffusers and stylish easy chairs covered in canvas. In the food court, the bar and counter tops were marble, the dining tables solid maple. Students were gathered around tables, lounging on the staircase, sprawled on the floor. The atmosphere was hard to pin down. This was not the precious, corporate modernism of Richard Meier, nor the contrived, technological wizardry of Norman Foster. It was certainly not the Calvinist minimalism that I associated with many trendy younger architects. I couldn’t put my finger on it until I realized that the functional but chic décor reminded me of the no-nonsense styling of a Benetton clothing store.
I happen to like Collegiate Gothic buildings. I like their dark rooms with wood paneling, hammer-beam ceilings, and traditional oak furniture. But seeing the York student center made me realize that whenever I walk through these old buildings I also experience a nagging dissatisfaction. It has to do with the students. The young men and women in baseball caps, shorts, stenciled sweat shirts, and iridescent nylon windbreakers just don’t fit in. They should be wearing boaters and blazers, tweeds and flannels. Of course, no student that I have ever seen—including at Oxford—dresses that way. I may deplore the loss of decorum, but as an architect I can’t do anything to change it. It is the building that must do the accommodating.
If the relationship between dress and décor is intimate, it is also one-sided. Interior decorators and architects will bridle at this, but there is no doubt that dress comes first. “People have always worn what they wanted to wear,” writes Anne Hollander, “fashion exists to keep fulfilling that desire.”6 And architecture must follow. For the truth is that a building—no matter how useful or well built or beautiful—that is not sympathetic to the way that people dress risks looking not merely anachronistic, but downright silly. Like it or not, architecture cannot escape fashion.


	
		
"WE HAVE SOME PLANES"

    Tuesday, September 11, 2001, dawned temperate and nearly cloudless in the eastern United States. Millions of men and women readied themselves for work. Some made their way to the Twin Towers, the signature structures of the World Trade Center complex in New York City. Others went to Arlington, Virginia, to the Pentagon. Across the Potomac River, the United States Congress was back in session. At the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue, people began to line up for a White House tour. In Sarasota, Florida, President George W. Bush went for an early morning run.

    For those heading to an airport, weather conditions could not have been better for a safe and pleasant journey. Among the travelers were Mohamed Atta and Abdul Aziz al Omari, who arrived at the airport in Portland, Maine.

INSIDE THE FOUR FLIGHTS

Boarding the Flights

    Boston: American 11 and United 175. Atta and Omari boarded a 6:00 A.M. flight from Portland to Boston's Logan International Airport.

    When he checked in for his flight to Boston, Atta was selected by a computerized prescreening system known as CAPPS (Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System), created to identify passengers who should be subject to special security measures. Under security rules in place at the time, the only consequence of Atta's selection by CAPPS was that his checked bags were held off the plane until it was confirmed that he had boarded the aircraft. This did not hinder Atta's plans.

    Atta and Omari arrived in Boston at 6:45. Seven minutes later, Atta apparently took a call from Marwan al Shehhi, a longtime colleague who was at another terminal at Logan Airport. They spoke for three minutes.

    It would be their final conversation.

    Between 6:45 and 7:40, Atta and Omari, along with Satam al Suqami, Wail al Shehri, and Waleed al Shehri, checked in and boarded American Airlines Flight 11, bound for Los Angeles. The flight was scheduled to depart at 7:45.

    In another Logan terminal, Shehhi, joined by Fayez Banihammad, Mohand al Shehri, Ahmed al Ghamdi, and Hamza al Ghamdi, checked in for United Airlines Flight 175, also bound for Los Angeles. A couple of Shehhi's colleagues were obviously unused to travel; according to the United ticket agent, they had trouble understanding the standard security questions, and she had to go over them slowly until they gave the routine, reassuring answers.

    Their flight was scheduled to depart at 8:00.

    The security checkpoints through which passengers, including Atta and his colleagues, gained access to the American 11 gate were operated by Globe Security under a contract with American Airlines. In a different terminal, the single checkpoint through which passengers for United 175 passed was controlled by United Airlines, which had contracted with Huntleigh USA to perform the screening.

    In passing through these checkpoints, each of the hijackers would have been screened by a walk-through metal detector calibrated to detect items with at least the metal content of a .22-caliber handgun. Anyone who might have set off that detector would have been screened with a hand wand-a procedure requiring the screener to identify the metal item or items that caused the alarm. In addition, an X-ray machine would have screened the hijackers' carry-on belongings. The screening was in place to identify and confiscate weapons and other items prohibited from being carried onto a commercial flight.

    None of the checkpoint supervisors recalled the hijackers or reported anything suspicious regarding their screening.

    While Atta had been selected by CAPPS in Portland, three members of his hijacking team-Suqami, Wail al Shehri, and Waleed al Shehri-were selected in Boston. Their selection affected only the handling of their checked bags, not their screening at the checkpoint. All five men cleared the checkpoint and made their way to the gate for American 11. Atta, Omari, and Suqami took their seats in business class (seats 8D, 8G, and 10B, respectively). The Shehri brothers had adjacent seats in row 2 (Wail in 2A, Waleed in 2B), in the firstclass cabin. They boarded American 11 between 7:31 and 7:40. The aircraft pushed back from the gate at 7:40.

    Shehhi and his team, none of whom had been selected by CAPPS, boarded United 175 between 7:23 and 7:28 (Banihammad in 2A, Shehri in 2B, Shehhi in 6C, Hamza al Ghamdi in 9C, and Ahmed al Ghamdi in 9D). Their aircraft pushed back from the gate just before 8:00.

    Washington Dulles: American 77. Hundreds of miles southwest of Boston, at Dulles International Airport in the Virginia suburbs of Washington, D.C., five more men were preparing to take their early morning flight. At 7:15, a pair of them, Khalid al Mihdhar and Majed Moqed, checked in at the American Airlines ticket counter for Flight 77, bound for Los Angeles. Within the next 20 minutes, they would be followed by Hani Hanjour and two brothers, Nawaf al Hazmi and Salem al Hazmi.

    Hani Hanjour, Khalid al Mihdhar, and Majed Moqed were flagged by CAPPS. The Hazmi brothers were also selected for extra scrutiny by the airline's customer service representative at the check-in counter. He did so because one of the brothers did not have photo identification nor could he understand English, and because the agent found both of the passengers to be suspicious. The only consequence of their selection was that their checked bags were held off the plane until it was confirmed that they had boarded the aircraft.

    All five hijackers passed through the Main Terminal's west security screening checkpoint; United Airlines, which was the responsible air carrier, had contracted out the work to Argenbright Security.

    The checkpoint featured closed-circuit television that recorded all passengers, including the hijackers, as they were screened. At 7:18, Mihdhar and Moqed entered the security checkpoint.

    Mihdhar and Moqed placed their carry-on bags on the belt of the X-ray machine and proceeded through the first metal detector. Both set off the alarm, and they were directed to a second metal detector. Mihdhar did not trigger the alarm and was permitted through the checkpoint. After Moqed set it off, a screener wanded him. He passed this inspection.

    About 20 minutes later, at 7:35, another passenger for Flight 77, Hani Hanjour, placed two carry-on bags on the X-ray belt in the Main Terminal's west checkpoint, and proceeded, without alarm, through the metal detector. A short time later, Nawaf and Salem al Hazmi entered the same checkpoint. Salem al Hazmi cleared the metal detector and was permitted through; Nawaf al Hazmi set off the alarms for both the first and second metal detectors and was then hand-wanded before being passed. In addition, his over-the-shoulder carry-on bag was swiped by an explosive trace detector and then passed. The video footage indicates that he was carrying an unidentified item in his back pocket, clipped to its rim.

    When the local civil aviation security office of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) later investigated these security screening operations, the screeners recalled nothing out of the ordinary. They could not recall that any of the passengers they screened were CAPPS selectees. We asked a screening expert to review the videotape of the hand-wanding, and he found the quality of the screener's work to have been "marginal at best." The screener should have "resolved" what set off the alarm; and in the case of both Moqed and Hazmi, it was clear that he did not.

    At 7:50, Majed Moqed and Khalid al Mihdhar boarded the flight and were seated in 12A and 12B in coach. Hani Hanjour, assigned to seat 1B (first class), soon followed. The Hazmi brothers, sitting in 5E and 5F, joined Hanjour in the first-class cabin.

    Newark: United 93. Between 7:03 and 7:39, Saeed al Ghamdi, Ahmed al Nami, Ahmad al Haznawi, and Ziad Jarrah checked in at the United Airlines ticket counter for Flight 93, going to Los Angeles. Two checked bags; two did not. Haznawi was selected by CAPPS. His checked bag was screened for explosives and then loaded on the plane.

    The four men passed through the security checkpoint, owned by United Airlines and operated under contract by Argenbright Security. Like the checkpoints in Boston, it lacked closed-circuit television surveillance so there is no documentary evidence to indicate when the hijackers passed through the checkpoint, what alarms may have been triggered, or what security procedures were administered. The FAA interviewed the screeners later; none recalled anything unusual or suspicious.

    The four men boarded the plane between 7:39 and 7:48. All four had seats in the first-class cabin; their plane had no business-class section. Jarrah was in seat 1B, closest to the cockpit; Nami was in 3C, Ghamdi in 3D, and Haznawi in 6B.

    The 19 men were aboard four transcontinental flights.

    They were planning to hijack these planes and turn them into large guided missiles, loaded with up to 11,400 gallons of jet fuel. By 8:00 A.M. on the morning of Tuesday, September 11,2001, they had defeated all the security layers that America's civil aviation security system then had in place to prevent a hijacking. The Hijacking of American 11 American Airlines Flight 11 provided nonstop service from Boston to Los Angeles. On September 11, Captain John Ogonowski and First Officer Thomas McGuinness piloted the Boeing 767. It carried its full capacity of nine flight attendants. Eighty-one passengers boarded the flight with them (including the five terrorists).22 The plane took off at 7:59. Just before 8:14, it had climbed to 26,000 feet, not quite its initial assigned cruising altitude of 29,000 feet. All communications and flight profile data were normal. About this time the "Fasten Seatbelt" sign would usually have been turned off and the flight attendants would have begun preparing for cabin service.

    At that same time, American 11 had its last routine communication with the ground when it acknowledged navigational instructions from the FAA's air traffic control (ATC) center in Boston. Sixteen seconds after that transmission, ATC instructed the aircraft's pilots to climb to 35,000 feet. That message and all subsequent attempts to contact the flight were not acknowledged. From this and other evidence, we believe the hijacking began at 8:14 or shortly thereafter.

    Reports from two flight attendants in the coach cabin, Betty Ong and Madeline "Amy" Sweeney, tell us most of what we know about how the hijacking happened. As it began, some of the hijackers-most likely Wail al Shehri and Waleed al Shehri, who were seated in row 2 in first class-stabbed the two unarmed flight attendants who would have been preparing for cabin service.

    We do not know exactly how the hijackers gained access to the cockpit; FAA rules required that the doors remain closed and locked during flight. Ong speculated that they had "jammed their way" in. Perhaps the terrorists stabbed the flight attendants to get a cockpit key, to force one of them to open the cockpit door, or to lure the captain or first officer out of the cockpit. Or the flight attendants may just have been in their way.

    At the same time or shortly thereafter, Atta-the only terrorist on board trained to fly a jet-would have moved to the cockpit from his business-class seat, possibly accompanied by Omari. As this was happening, passenger Daniel Lewin, who was seated in the row just behind Atta and Omari, was stabbed by one of the hijackers-probably Satam al Suqami, who was seated directly behind Lewin. Lewin had served four years as an officer in the Israeli military. He may have made an attempt to stop the hijackers in front of him, not realizing that another was sitting behind him.

    The hijackers quickly gained control and sprayed Mace, pepper spray, or some other irritant in the first-class cabin, in order to force the passengers and flight attendants toward the rear of the plane. They claimed they had a bomb.

    About five minutes after the hijacking began, Betty Ong contacted the American Airlines Southeastern Reservations Office in Cary, North Carolina, via an AT&T airphone to report an emergency aboard the flight. This was the first of several occasions on 9/11 when flight attendants took action outside the scope of their training, which emphasized that in a hijacking, they were to communicate with the cockpit crew. The emergency call lasted approximately 25 minutes, as Ong calmly and professionally relayed information about events taking place aboard the airplane to authorities on the ground.

    At 8:19, Ong reported:"The cockpit is not answering, somebody's stabbed in business class-and I think there's Mace-that we can't breathe-I don't know, I think we're getting hijacked." She then told of the stabbings of the two flight attendants.

    At 8:21, one of the American employees receiving Ong's call in North Carolina, Nydia Gonzalez, alerted the American Airlines operations center in Fort Worth, Texas, reaching Craig Marquis, the manager on duty. Marquis soon realized this was an emergency and instructed the airline's dispatcher responsible for the flight to contact the cockpit. At 8:23, the dispatcher tried unsuccessfully to contact the aircraft. Six minutes later, the air traffic control specialist in American's operations center contacted the FAA's Boston Air Traffic Control Center about the flight. The center was already aware of the problem.

    Boston Center knew of a problem on the flight in part because just before 8:25 the hijackers had attempted to communicate with the passengers. The microphone was keyed, and immediately one of the hijackers said, "Nobody move. Everything will be okay. If you try to make any moves, you'll endanger yourself and the airplane. Just stay quiet." Air traffic controllers heard the transmission; Ong did not. The hijackers probably did not know how to operate the cockpit radio communication system correctly, and thus inadvertently broadcast their message over the air traffic control channel instead of the cabin public-address channel. Also at 8:25, and again at 8:29, Amy Sweeney got through to the American Flight Services Office in Boston but was cut off after she reported someone was hurt aboard the flight. Three minutes later, Sweeney was reconnected to the office and began relaying updates to the manager, Michael Woodward.

    At 8:26, Ong reported that the plane was "flying erratically." A minute later, Flight 11 turned south. American also began getting identifications of the hijackers, as Ong and then Sweeney passed on some of the seat numbers of those who had gained unauthorized access to the cockpit.

    Sweeney calmly reported on her line that the plane had been hijacked; a man in first class had his throat slashed; two flight attendants had been stabbed-one was seriously hurt and was on oxygen while the other's wounds seemed minor; a doctor had been requested; the flight attendants were unable to contact the cockpit; and there was a bomb in the cockpit. Sweeney told Woodward that she and Ong were trying to relay as much information as they could to people on the ground.

    At 8:38, Ong told Gonzalez that the plane was flying erratically again. Around this time Sweeney told Woodward that the hijackers were Middle Easterners, naming three of their seat numbers. One spoke very little English and one spoke excellent English. The hijackers had gained entry to the cockpit, and she did not know how. The aircraft was in a rapid descent.

    At 8:41, Sweeney told Woodward that passengers in coach were under the impression that there was a routine medical emergency in first class. Other flight attendants were busy at duties such as getting medical supplies while Ong and Sweeney were reporting the events.

    At 8:41, in American's operations center, a colleague told Marquis that the air traffic controllers declared Flight 11 a hijacking and "think he's [American 11] headed toward Kennedy [airport in New York City]. They're moving everybody out of the way. They seem to have him on a primary radar. They seem to think that he is descending."

    At 8:44, Gonzalez reported losing phone contact with Ong. About this same time Sweeney reported to Woodward, "Something is wrong. We are in a rapid descent。 we are all over the place." Woodward asked Sweeney to look out the window to see if she could determine where they were. Sweeney responded:"We are flying low. We are flying very, very low. We are flying way too low." Seconds later she said,"Oh my God we are way too low." The phone call ended.

    At 8:46:40, American 11 crashed into the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City.

    All on board, along with an unknown number of people in the tower, were killed instantly.

    The Hijacking of United 175 United Airlines Flight 175 was scheduled to depart for Los Angeles at 8:00. Captain Victor Saracini and First Officer Michael Horrocks piloted the Boeing 767, which had seven flight attendants. Fifty-six passengers boarded the flight.

    United 175 pushed back from its gate at 7:58 and departed Logan Airport at 8:14. By 8:33, it had reached its assigned cruising altitude of 31,000 feet. The flight attendants would have begun their cabin service.

    The flight had taken off just as American 11 was being hijacked, and at 8:42 the United 175 flight crew completed their report on a "suspicious transmission" overheard from another plane (which turned out to have been Flight 11) just after takeoff. This was United 175's last communication with the ground.

    The hijackers attacked sometime between 8:42 and 8:46. They used knives (as reported by two passengers and a flight attendant), Mace (reported by one passenger), and the threat of a bomb (reported by the same passenger). They stabbed members of the flight crew (reported by a flight attendant and one passenger). Both pilots had been killed (reported by one flight attendant). The eyewitness accounts came from calls made from the rear of the plane, from passengers originally seated further forward in the cabin, a sign that passengers and perhaps crew had been moved to the back of the aircraft. Given similarities to American 11 in hijacker seating and in eyewitness reports of tactics and weapons, as well as the contact between the presumed team leaders, Atta and Shehhi, we believe the tactics were similar on both flights.

    The first operational evidence that something was abnormal on United 175 came at 8:47, when the aircraft changed beacon codes twice within a minute. At 8:51, the flight deviated from its assigned altitude, and a minute later New York air traffic controllers began repeatedly and unsuccessfully trying to contact it.

    At 8:52, in Easton, Connecticut, a man named Lee Hanson received a phone call from his son Peter, a passenger on United 175. His son told him: "I think they've taken over the cockpit-An attendant has been stabbed- and someone else up front may have been killed. The plane is making strange moves. Call United Airlines-Tell them it's Flight 175, Boston to LA." Lee Hanson then called the Easton Police Department and relayed what he had heard.

    Also at 8:52, a male flight attendant called a United office in San Francisco, reaching Marc Policastro. The flight attendant reported that the flight had been hijacked, both pilots had been killed, a flight attendant had been stabbed, and the hijackers were probably flying the plane. The call lasted about two minutes, after which Policastro and a colleague tried unsuccessfully to contact the flight.

    At 8:58, the flight took a heading toward New York City.

    At 8:59, Flight 175 passenger Brian David Sweeney tried to call his wife, Julie. He left a message on their home answering machine that the plane had been hijacked. He then called his mother, Louise Sweeney, told her the flight had been hijacked, and added that the passengers were thinking about storming the cockpit to take control of the plane away from the hijackers.

    At 9:00, Lee Hanson received a second call from his son Peter: It's getting bad, Dad-A stewardess was stabbed-They seem to have knives and Mace-They said they have a bomb-It's getting very bad on the plane-Passengers are throwing up and getting sick-The plane is making jerky movements-I don't think the pilot is flying the plane-I think we are going down-I think they intend to go to Chicago or someplace and fly into a building-Don't worry, Dad- If it happens, it'll be very fast-My God, my God.

    The call ended abruptly. Lee Hanson had heard a woman scream just before it cut off. He turned on a television, and in her home so did Louise Sweeney. Both then saw the second aircraft hit the World Trade Center.

    At 9:03:11, United Airlines Flight 175 struck the South Tower of the World Trade Center.

    All on board, along with an unknown number of people in the tower, were killed instantly.

    The Hijacking of American 77 American Airlines Flight 77 was scheduled to depart from Washington Dulles for Los Angeles at 8:10. The aircraft was a Boeing 757 piloted by Captain Charles F. Burlingame and First Officer David Charlebois. There were four flight attendants. On September 11, the flight carried 58 passengers.

    American 77 pushed back from its gate at 8:09 and took off at 8:20. At 8:46, the flight reached its assigned cruising altitude of 35,000 feet. Cabin service would have begun. At 8:51, American 77 transmitted its last routine radio communication. The hijacking began between 8:51 and 8:54. As on American 11 and United 175, the hijackers used knives (reported by one passenger) and moved all the passengers (and possibly crew) to the rear of the aircraft (reported by one flight attendant and one passenger). Unlike the earlier flights, the Flight 77 hijackers were reported by a passenger to have box cutters. Finally, a passenger reported that an announcement had been made by the "pilot" that the plane had been hijacked. Neither of the firsthand accounts mentioned any stabbings or the threat or use of either a bomb or Mace, though both witnesses began the flight in the first-class cabin.

    At 8:54, the aircraft deviated from its assigned course, turning south. Two minutes later the transponder was turned off and even primary radar contact with the aircraft was lost. The Indianapolis Air Traffic Control Center repeatedly tried and failed to contact the aircraft. American Airlines dispatchers also tried, without success.

    At 9:00, American Airlines Executive Vice President Gerard Arpey learned that communications had been lost with American 77. This was now the second American aircraft in trouble. He ordered all American Airlines flights in the Northeast that had not taken off to remain on the ground. Shortly before 9:10, suspecting that American 77 had been hijacked, American headquarters concluded that the second aircraft to hit the World Trade Center might have been Flight 77. After learning that United Airlines was missing a plane, American Airlines headquarters extended the ground stop nationwide.

    At 9:12, Renee May called her mother, Nancy May, in Las Vegas. She said her flight was being hijacked by six individuals who had moved them to the rear of the plane. She asked her mother to alert American Airlines. Nancy May and her husband promptly did so.

    At some point between 9:16 and 9:26, Barbara Olson called her husband, Ted Olson, the solicitor general of the United States. She reported that the flight had been hijacked, and the hijackers had knives and box cutters. She further indicated that the hijackers were not aware of her phone call, and that they had put all the passengers in the back of the plane. About a minute into the conversation, the call was cut off. Solicitor General Olson tried unsuccessfully to reach Attorney General John Ashcroft.

    Shortly after the first call, Barbara Olson reached her husband again. She reported that the pilot had announced that the flight had been hijacked, and she asked her husband what she should tell the captain to do. Ted Olson asked for her location and she replied that the aircraft was then flying over houses. Another passenger told her they were traveling northeast. The Solicitor General then informed his wife of the two previous hijackings and crashes. She did not display signs of panic and did not indicate any awareness of an impending crash. At that point, the second call was cut off.

    At 9:29, the autopilot on American 77 was disengaged; the aircraft was at 7,000 feet and approximately 38 miles west of the Pentagon.

    At 9:32, controllers at the Dulles Terminal Radar Approach Control "observed a primary radar target tracking eastbound at a high rate of speed." This was later determined to have been Flight 77.

    At 9:34, Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport advised the Secret Service of an unknown aircraft heading in the direction of the White House. American 77 was then 5 miles west-southwest of the Pentagon and began a 330-degree turn. At the end of the turn, it was descending through 2,200 feet, pointed toward the Pentagon and downtown Washington. The hijacker pilot then advanced the throttles to maximum power and dove toward the Pentagon.

    At 9:37:46, American Airlines Flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon, traveling at approximately 530 miles per hour.

    All on board, as well as many civilian and military personnel in the building, were killed.

    The Battle for United 93 At 8:42, United Airlines Flight 93 took off from Newark (New Jersey) Liberty International Airport bound for San Francisco. The aircraft was piloted by Captain Jason Dahl and First Officer Leroy Homer, and there were five flight attendants. Thirty-seven passengers, including the hijackers, boarded the plane. Scheduled to depart the gate at 8:00, the Boeing 757's takeoff was delayed because of the airport's typically heavy morning traffic.

    The hijackers had planned to take flights scheduled to depart at 7:45 (American 11), 8:00 (United 175 and United 93), and 8:10 (American 77). Three of the flights had actually taken off within 10 to 15 minutes of their planned departure times. United 93 would ordinarily have taken off about 15 minutes after pulling away from the gate. When it left the ground at 8:42, the flight was running more than 25 minutes late.

    As United 93 left Newark, the flight's crew members were unaware of the hijacking of American 11. Around 9:00, the FAA, American, and United were facing the staggering realization of apparent multiple hijackings. At 9:03, they would see another aircraft strike the World Trade Center. Crisis managers at the FAA and the airlines did not yet act to warn other aircraft.

    At the same time, Boston Center realized that a message transmitted just before 8:25 by the hijacker pilot of American 11 included the phrase, "We have some planes."

    No one at the FAA or the airlines that day had ever dealt with multiple hijackings. Such a plot had not been carried out anywhere in the world in more than 30 years, and never in the United States. As news of the hijackings filtered through the FAA and the airlines, it does not seem to have occurred to their leadership that they needed to alert other aircraft in the air that they too might be at risk.

    United 175 was hijacked between 8:42 and 8:46, and awareness of that hijacking began to spread after 8:51. American 77 was hijacked between 8:51 and 8:54. By 9:00, FAA and airline officials began to comprehend that attackers were going after multiple aircraft. American Airlines' nationwide ground stop between 9:05 and 9:10 was followed by a United Airlines ground stop. FAA controllers at Boston Center, which had tracked the first two hijackings, requested at 9:07 that Herndon Command Center "get messages to airborne aircraft to increase security for the cockpit." There is no evidence that Herndon took such action. Boston Center immediately began speculating about other aircraft that might be in danger, leading them to worry about a transcontinental flight-Delta 1989-that in fact was not hijacked. At 9:19, the FAA's New England regional office called Herndon and asked that Cleveland Center advise Delta 1989 to use extra cockpit security.

    Several FAA air traffic control officials told us it was the air carriers' responsibility to notify their planes of security problems. One senior FAA air traffic control manager said that it was simply not the FAA's place to order the airlines what to tell their pilots.

    We believe such statements do not reflect an adequate appreciation of the FAA's responsibility for the safety and security of civil aviation.

    The airlines bore responsibility, too. They were facing an escalating number of conflicting and, for the most part, erroneous reports about other flights, as well as a continuing lack of vital information from the FAA about the hijacked flights. We found no evidence, however, that American Airlines sent any cockpit warnings to its aircraft on 9/11. United's first decisive action to notify its airborne aircraft to take defensive action did not come until 9:19, when a United flight dispatcher, Ed Ballinger, took the initiative to begin transmitting warnings to his 16 transcontinental flights: "Beware any cockpit intrusion- Two a/c [aircraft] hit World Trade Center." One of the flights that received the warning was United 93. Because Ballinger was still responsible for his other flights as well as Flight 175, his warning message was not transmitted to Flight 93 until 9:23.

    By all accounts, the first 46 minutes of Flight 93's cross-country trip proceeded routinely. Radio communications from the plane were normal. Heading, speed, and altitude ran according to plan. At 9:24, Ballinger's warning to United 93 was received in the cockpit. Within two minutes, at 9:26, the pilot, Jason Dahl, responded with a note of puzzlement: "Ed, confirm latest mssg plz-Jason."

    The hijackers attacked at 9:28. While traveling 35,000 feet above eastern Ohio, United 93 suddenly dropped 700 feet. Eleven seconds into the descent, the FAA's air traffic control center in Cleveland received the first of two radio transmissions from the aircraft. During the first broadcast, the captain or first officer could be heard declaring "Mayday" amid the sounds of a physical struggle in the cockpit. The second radio transmission, 35 seconds later, indicated that the fight was continuing. The captain or first officer could be heard shouting:" Hey get out of here-get out of here-get out of here."

    On the morning of 9/11, there were only 37 passengers on United 93-33 in addition to the 4 hijackers. This was below the norm for Tuesday mornings during the summer of 2001. But there is no evidence that the hijackers manipulated passenger levels or purchased additional seats to facilitate their operation.

    The terrorists who hijacked three other commercial flights on 9/11 operated in five-man teams. They initiated their cockpit takeover within 30 minutes of takeoff. On Flight 93, however, the takeover took place 46 minutes after takeoff and there were only four hijackers. The operative likely intended to round out the team for this flight, Mohamed al Kahtani, had been refused entry by a suspicious immigration inspector at Florida's Orlando International Airport in August.

    Because several passengers on United 93 described three hijackers on the plane, not four, some have wondered whether one of the hijackers had been able to use the cockpit jump seat from the outset of the flight. FAA rules allow use of this seat by documented and approved individuals, usually air carrier or FAA personnel. We have found no evidence indicating that one of the hijackers, or anyone else, sat there on this flight. All the hijackers had assigned seats in first class, and they seem to have used them. We believe it is more likely that Jarrah, the crucial pilot-trained member of their team, remained seated and inconspicuous until after the cockpit was seized; and once inside, he would not have been visible to the passengers.

    At 9:32, a hijacker, probably Jarrah, made or attempted to make the following announcement to the passengers of Flight 93:"Ladies and Gentlemen: Here the captain, please sit down keep remaining sitting. We have a bomb on board. So, sit." The flight data recorder (also recovered) indicates that Jarrah then instructed the plane's autopilot to turn the aircraft around and head east.

    The cockpit voice recorder data indicate that a woman, most likely a flight attendant, was being held captive in the cockpit. She struggled with one of the hijackers who killed or otherwise silenced her.

    Shortly thereafter, the passengers and flight crew began a series of calls from GTE airphones and cellular phones. These calls between family, friends, and colleagues took place until the end of the flight and provided those on the ground with firsthand accounts. They enabled the passengers to gain critical information, including the news that two aircraft had slammed into the World Trade Center.

    At 9:39, the FAA's Cleveland Air Route Traffic Control Center overheard a second announcement indicating that there was a bomb on board, that the plane was returning to the airport, and that they should remain seated.

    While it apparently was not heard by the passengers, this announcement, like those on Flight 11 and Flight 77, was intended to deceive them. Jarrah, like Atta earlier, may have inadvertently broadcast the message because he did not know how to operate the radio and the intercom. To our knowledge none of them had ever flown an actual airliner before.

    At least two callers from the flight reported that the hijackers knew that passengers were making calls but did not seem to care. It is quite possible Jarrah knew of the success of the assault on the World Trade Center. He could have learned of this from messages being sent by United Airlines to the cockpits of its transcontinental flights, including Flight 93, warning of cockpit intrusion and telling of the New York attacks. But even without them, he would certainly have understood that the attacks on the World Trade Center would already have unfolded, given Flight 93's tardy departure from Newark. If Jarrah did know that the passengers were making calls, it might not have occurred to him that they were certain to learn what had happened in New York, thereby defeating his attempts at deception.

    At least ten passengers and two crew members shared vital information with family, friends, colleagues, or others on the ground. All understood the plane had been hijacked. They said the hijackers wielded knives and claimed to have a bomb. The hijackers were wearing red bandanas, and they forced the passengers to the back of the aircraft.

    Callers reported that a passenger had been stabbed and that two people were lying on the floor of the cabin, injured or dead-possibly the captain and first officer. One caller reported that a flight attendant had been killed.

    One of the callers from United 93 also reported that he thought the hijackers might possess a gun. But none of the other callers reported the presence of a firearm. One recipient of a call from the aircraft recounted specifically asking her caller whether the hijackers had guns. The passenger replied that he did not see one. No evidence of firearms or of their identifiable remains was found at the aircraft's crash site, and the cockpit voice recorder gives no indication of a gun being fired or mentioned at any time. We believe that if the hijackers had possessed a gun, they would have used it in the flight's last minutes as the passengers fought back.

    Passengers on three flights reported the hijackers' claim of having a bomb. The FBI told us they found no trace of explosives at the crash sites. One of the passengers who mentioned a bomb expressed his belief that it was not real. Lacking any evidence that the hijackers attempted to smuggle such illegal items past the security screening checkpoints, we believe the bombs were probably fake.

    During at least five of the passengers' phone calls, information was shared about the attacks that had occurred earlier that morning at the World Trade Center. Five calls described the intent of passengers and surviving crew members to revolt against the hijackers. According to one call, they voted on whether to rush the terrorists in an attempt to retake the plane. They decided, and acted.

    At 9:57, the passenger assault began. Several passengers had terminated phone calls with loved ones in order to join the revolt. One of the callers ended her message as follows:"Everyone's running up to first class. I've got to go. Bye."

    The cockpit voice recorder captured the sounds of the passenger assault muffled by the intervening cockpit door. Some family members who listened to the recording report that they can hear the voice of a loved one among the din. We cannot identify whose voices can be heard. But the assault was sustained.

    In response, Jarrah immediately began to roll the airplane to the left and right, attempting to knock the passengers off balance. At 9:58:57, Jarrah told another hijacker in the cockpit to block the door. Jarrah continued to roll the airplane sharply left and right, but the assault continued. At 9:59:52, Jarrah changed tactics and pitched the nose of the airplane up and down to disrupt the assault. The recorder captured the sounds of loud thumps, crashes, shouts, and breaking glasses and plates. At 10:00:03, Jarrah stabilized the airplane.

    Five seconds later, Jarrah asked, "Is that it? Shall we finish it off?"A hijacker responded,"No. Not yet. When they all come, we finish it off." The sounds of fighting continued outside the cockpit. Again, Jarrah pitched the nose of the aircraft up and down. At 10:00:26, a passenger in the background said,"In the cockpit. If we don't we'll die!" Sixteen seconds later, a passenger yelled,"Roll it!" Jarrah stopped the violent maneuvers at about 10:01:00 and said,"Allah is the greatest! Allah is the greatest!" He then asked another hijacker in the cockpit," Is that it? I mean, shall we put it down?" to which the other replied,"Yes, put it in it, and pull it down."

    The passengers continued their assault and at 10:02:23, a hijacker said, "Pull it down! Pull it down!"The hijackers remained at the controls but must have judged that the passengers were only seconds from overcoming them. The airplane headed down; the control wheel was turned hard to the right. The airplane rolled onto its back, and one of the hijackers began shouting "Allah is the greatest. Allah is the greatest." With the sounds of the passenger counterattack continuing, the aircraft plowed into an empty field in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, at 580 miles per hour, about 20 minutes' flying time from Washington, D.C.

    Jarrah's objective was to crash his airliner into symbols of the American Republic, the Capitol or the White House. He was defeated by the alerted, unarmed passengers of United 93.

IMPROVISING A HOMELAND DEFENSE

The FAA and NORAD

    On 9/11, the defense of U.S. airspace depended on close interaction between two federal agencies: the FAA and the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD). The most recent hijacking that involved U.S. air traffic controllers, FAA management, and military coordination had occurred in 1993.90 In order to understand how the two agencies interacted eight years later, we will review their missions, command and control structures, and working relationship on the morning of 9/11.

    FAA Mission and Structure. As of September 11, 2001, the FAA was mandated by law to regulate the safety and security of civil aviation. From an air traffic controller's perspective, that meant maintaining a safe distance between airborne aircraft.

    Many controllers work at the FAA's 22 Air Route Traffic Control Centers. They are grouped under regional offices and coordinate closely with the national Air Traffic Control System Command Center, located in Herndon, Virginia, which oversees daily traffic flow within the entire airspace system. FAA headquarters is ultimately responsible for the management of the National Airspace System. The Operations Center located at FAA headquarters receives notifications of incidents, including accidents and hijackings.

    FAA Control Centers often receive information and make operational decisions independently of one another. On 9/11, the four hijacked aircraft were monitored mainly by the centers in Boston, New York, Cleveland, and Indianapolis. Each center thus had part of the knowledge of what was going on across the system. What Boston knew was not necessarily known by centers in New York, Cleveland, or Indianapolis, or for that matter by the Command Center in Herndon or by FAA headquarters in Washington.

    Controllers track airliners such as the four aircraft hijacked on 9/11 primarily by watching the data from a signal emitted by each aircraft's transponder equipment. Those four planes, like all aircraft traveling above 10,000 feet, were required to emit a unique transponder signal while in flight.

    On 9/11, the terrorists turned off the transponders on three of the four hijacked aircraft. With its transponder off, it is possible, though more difficult, to track an aircraft by its primary radar returns. But unlike transponder data, primary radar returns do not show the aircraft's identity and altitude. Controllers at centers rely so heavily on transponder signals that they usually do not display primary radar returns on their radar scopes. But they can change the configuration of their scopes so they can see primary radar returns. They did this on 9/11 when the transponder signals for three of the aircraft disappeared.

    Before 9/11, it was not unheard of for a commercial aircraft to deviate slightly from its course, or for an FAA controller to lose radio contact with a pilot for a short period of time. A controller could also briefly lose a commercial aircraft's transponder signal, although this happened much less frequently. However, the simultaneous loss of radio and transponder signal would be a rare and alarming occurrence, and would normally indicate a catastrophic system failure or an aircraft crash. In all of these instances, the job of the controller was to reach out to the aircraft, the parent company of the aircraft, and other planes in the vicinity in an attempt to reestablish communications and set the aircraft back on course. Alarm bells would not start ringing until these efforts-which could take five minutes or more-were tried and had failed.

NORAD Mission and Structure. NORAD is a binational command established in 1958 between the United States and Canada. Its mission was, and is, to defend the airspace of North America and protect the continent. That mission does not distinguish between internal and external threats; but because NORAD was created to counter the Soviet threat, it came to define its job as defending against external attacks.

    The threat of Soviet bombers diminished significantly as the Cold War ended, and the number of NORAD alert sites was reduced from its Cold War high of 26. Some within the Pentagon argued in the 1990s that the alert sites should be eliminated entirely. In an effort to preserve their mission, members of the air defense community advocated the importance of air sovereignty against emerging "asymmetric threats" to the United States: drug smuggling, "non-state and state-sponsored terrorists," and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile technology.

    NORAD perceived the dominant threat to be from cruise missiles. Other threats were identified during the late 1990s, including terrorists' use of aircraft as weapons. Exercises were conducted to counter this threat, but they were not based on actual intelligence. In most instances, the main concern was the use of such aircraft to deliver weapons of mass destruction.

    Prior to 9/11, it was understood that an order to shoot down a commercial aircraft would have to be issued by the National Command Authority (a phrase used to describe the president and secretary of defense). Exercise planners also assumed that the aircraft would originate from outside the United States, allowing time to identify the target and scramble interceptors. The threat of terrorists hijacking commercial airliners within the United States-and using them as guided missiles-was not recognized by NORAD before 9/11. Notwithstanding the identification of these emerging threats, by 9/11 there were only seven alert sites left in the United States, each with two fighter aircraft on alert. This led some NORAD commanders to worry that NORAD was not postured adequately to protect the United States.

    In the United States, NORAD is divided into three sectors. On 9/11, all the hijacked aircraft were in NORAD's Northeast Air Defense Sector (also known as NEADS), which is based in Rome, New York. That morning NEADS could call on two alert sites, each with one pair of ready fighters: Otis Air National Guard Base in Cape Cod, Massachusetts, and Langley Air Force Base in Hampton, Virginia.

    Other facilities, not on "alert," would need time to arm the fighters and organize crews.

    NEADS reported to the Continental U.S. NORAD Region (CONR) headquarters, in Panama City, Florida, which in turn reported to NORAD headquarters, in Colorado Springs, Colorado.

Interagency Collaboration. The FAA and NORAD had developed protocols for working together in the event of a hijacking. As they existed on 9/11, the protocols for the FAA to obtain military assistance from NORAD required multiple levels of notification and approval at the highest levels of government.

    FAA guidance to controllers on hijack procedures assumed that the aircraft pilot would notify the controller via radio or by"squawking"a transponder code of "7500"-the universal code for a hijack in progress. Controllers would notify their supervisors, who in turn would inform management all the way up to FAA headquarters in Washington. Headquarters had a hijack coordinator, who was the director of the FAA Office of Civil Aviation Security or his or her designate.

    If a hijack was confirmed, procedures called for the hijack coordinator on duty to contact the Pentagon's National Military Command Center (NMCC) and to ask for a military escort aircraft to follow the flight, report anything unusual, and aid search and rescue in the event of an emergency. The NMCC would then seek approval from the Office of the Secretary of Defense to provide military assistance. If approval was given, the orders would be transmitted down NORAD's chain of command.

    The NMCC would keep the FAA hijack coordinator up to date and help the FAA centers coordinate directly with the military. NORAD would receive tracking information for the hijacked aircraft either from joint use radar or from the relevant FAA air traffic control facility. Every attempt would be made to have the hijacked aircraft squawk 7500 to help NORAD track it.

    The protocols did not contemplate an intercept. They assumed the fighter escort would be discreet, "vectored to a position five miles directly behind the hijacked aircraft," where it could perform its mission to monitor the aircraft's flight path.

    In sum, the protocols in place on 9/11 for the FAA and NORAD to respond to a hijacking presumed that


the hijacked aircraft would be readily identifiable and would not attempt to disappear;

there would be time to address the problem through the appropriate FAA and NORAD chains of command; and

the hijacking would take the traditional form: that is, it would not be a suicide hijacking designed to convert the aircraft into a guided missile.


    On the morning of 9/11, the existing protocol was unsuited in every respect for what was about to happen.

American Airlines Flight 11

FAA Awareness. Although the Boston Center air traffic controller realized at an early stage that there was something wrong with American 11, he did not immediately interpret the plane's failure to respond as a sign that it had been hijacked. At 8:14, when the flight failed to heed his instruction to climb to 35,000 feet, the controller repeatedly tried to raise the flight. He reached out to the pilot on the emergency frequency. Though there was no response, he kept trying to contact the aircraft.

    At 8:21, American 11 turned off its transponder, immediately degrading the information available about the aircraft. The controller told his supervisor that he thought something was seriously wrong with the plane, although neither suspected a hijacking. The supervisor instructed the controller to follow standard procedures for handling a "no radio" aircraft.

    The controller checked to see if American Airlines could establish communication with American 11. He became even more concerned as its route changed, moving into another sector's airspace. Controllers immediately began to move aircraft out of its path, and asked other aircraft in the vicinity to look for American 11.

    At 8:24:38, the following transmission came from American 11: American 11: We have some planes. Just stay quiet, and you'll be okay. We are returning to the airport.

    The controller only heard something unintelligible; he did not hear the specific words "we have some planes." The next transmission came seconds later: American 11: Nobody move. Everything will be okay. If you try to make any moves, you'll endanger yourself and the airplane. Just stay quiet.

    The controller told us that he then knew it was a hijacking. He alerted his supervisor, who assigned another controller to assist him. He redoubled his efforts to ascertain the flight's altitude. Because the controller didn't understand the initial transmission, the manager of Boston Center instructed his quality assurance specialist to "pull the tape" of the radio transmission, listen to it closely, and report back.

    Between 8:25 and 8:32, in accordance with the FAA protocol, Boston Center managers started notifying their chain of command that American 11 had been hijacked. At 8:28, Boston Center called the Command Center in Herndon to advise that it believed American 11 had been hijacked and was heading toward New York Center's airspace.

    By this time, American 11 had taken a dramatic turn to the south. At 8:32, the Command Center passed word of a possible hijacking to the Operations Center at FAA headquarters. The duty officer replied that security personnel at headquarters had just begun discussing the apparent hijack on a conference call with the New England regional office. FAA headquarters began to follow the hijack protocol but did not contact the NMCC to request a fighter escort.

    The Herndon Command Center immediately established a teleconference between Boston, New York, and Cleveland Centers so that Boston Center could help the others understand what was happening.

    At 8:34, the Boston Center controller received a third transmission from American 11:

    American 11: Nobody move please. We are going back to the airport. Don't try to make any stupid moves.

    In the succeeding minutes, controllers were attempting to ascertain the altitude of the southbound flight.

Military Notification and Response. Boston Center did not follow the protocol in seeking military assistance through the prescribed chain of command. In addition to notifications within the FAA, Boston Center took the initiative, at 8:34, to contact the military through the FAA's Cape Cod facility. The center also tried to contact a former alert site in Atlantic City, unaware it had been phased out. At 8:37:52, Boston Center reached NEADS. This was the first notification received by the military-at any level-that American 11 had been hijacked:

    FAA: Hi. Boston Center TMU [Traffic Management Unit], we have a problem here. We have a hijacked aircraft headed towards New York, and we need you guys to, we need someone to scramble some F-16s or something up there, help us out.

    NEADS: Is this real-world or exercise?

    FAA: No, this is not an exercise, not a test. 

    NEADS ordered to battle stations the two F-15 alert aircraft at Otis Air Force Base in Falmouth, Massachusetts, 153 miles away from New York City. The air defense of America began with this call.

    At NEADS, the report of the hijacking was relayed immediately to Battle Commander Colonel Robert Marr. After ordering the Otis fighters to battle stations, Colonel Marr phoned Major General Larry Arnold, commanding general of the First Air Force and NORAD's Continental Region. Marr sought authorization to scramble the Otis fighters. General Arnold later recalled instructing Marr to "go ahead and scramble them, and we'll get authorities later." General Arnold then called NORAD headquarters to report. 

    F-15 fighters were scrambled at 8:46 from Otis Air Force Base. But NEADS did not know where to send the alert fighter aircraft, and the officer directing the fighters pressed for more information:"I don't know where I'm scrambling these guys to. I need a direction, a destination." Because the hijackers had turned off the plane's transponder, NEADS personnel spent the next minutes searching their radar scopes for the primary radar return. American 11 struck the NorthTower at 8:46. Shortly after 8:50, while NEADS personnel were still trying to locate the flight, word reached them that a plane had hit the World Trade Center. 

    Radar data show the Otis fighters were airborne at 8:53. Lacking a target, they were vectored toward military-controlled airspace off the Long Island coast. To avoid New York area air traffic and uncertain about what to do, the fighters were brought down to military airspace to "hold as needed." From 9:09 to 9:13, the Otis fighters stayed in this holding pattern.

    In summary, NEADS received notice of the hijacking nine minutes before it struck the North Tower. That nine minutes' notice before impact was the most the military would receive of any of the four hijackings. 

United Airlines Flight 175 
	
FAA Awareness. One of the last transmissions from United Airlines Flight 175 is, in retrospect, chilling. By 8:40, controllers at the FAA's New York Center were seeking information on American 11. At approximately 8:42, shortly after entering New York Center's airspace, the pilot of United 175 broke in with the following transmission:

    UAL 175: New York UAL 175 heavy.

    FAA: UAL 175 go ahead.

    UAL 175: Yeah. We figured we'd wait to go to your center. Ah, we heard a suspicious transmission on our departure out of Boston, ah, with someone, ah, it sounded like someone keyed the mikes and said ah everyone ah stay in your seats.

    FAA: Oh, okay. I'll pass that along over here.

    Minutes later, United 175 turned southwest without clearance from air traffic control. At 8:47, seconds after the impact of American 11, United 175's transponder code changed, and then changed again. These changes were not noticed for several minutes, however, because the same New York Center controller was assigned to both American 11 and United 175. The controller knew American 11 was hijacked; he was focused on searching for it after the aircraft disappeared at 8:46.

    At 8:48, while the controller was still trying to locate American 11, a New York Center manager provided the following report on a Command Center teleconference about American 11:

    Manager, New York Center: Okay. This is New York Center. We're watching the airplane. I also had conversation with American Airlines, and they've told us that they believe that one of their stewardesses was stabbed and that there are people in the cockpit that have control of the aircraft, and that's all the information they have right now.

    The New York Center controller and manager were unaware that American 11 had already crashed.

    At 8:51, the controller noticed the transponder change from United 175 and tried to contact the aircraft. There was no response. Beginning at 8:52, the controller made repeated attempts to reach the crew of United 175. Still no response. The controller checked his radio equipment and contacted another controller at 8:53, saying that "we may have a hijack" and that he could not find the aircraft.

    Another commercial aircraft in the vicinity then radioed in with "reports over the radio of a commuter plane hitting the World Trade Center." The controller spent the next several minutes handing off the other flights on his scope to other controllers and moving aircraft out of the way of the unidentified aircraft (believed to be United 175) as it moved southwest and then turned northeast toward New York City.

    At about 8:55, the controller in charge notified a New York Center manager that she believed United 175 had also been hijacked. The manager tried to notify the regional managers and was told that they were discussing a hijacked aircraft (presumably American 11) and refused to be disturbed. At 8:58, the New York Center controller searching for United 175 told another New York controller "we might have a hijack over here, two of them."

    Between 9:01 and 9:02, a manager from New York Center told the Command Center in Herndon:

    Manager, New York Center: We have several situations going on here. It's escalating big, big time. We need to get the military involved with u。 . We're, we're involved with something else, we have other aircraft that may have a similar situation going on here.

    The "other aircraft" referred to by New York Center was United 175. Evidence indicates that this conversation was the only notice received by either FAA headquarters or the Herndon Command Center prior to the second crash that there had been a second hijacking.

    While the Command Center was told about this "other aircraft" at 9:01, New York Center contacted New York terminal approach control and asked for help in locating United 175.

    Terminal: I got somebody who keeps coasting but it looks like he's going into one of the small airports down there.

    Center: Hold on a second. I'm trying to bring him up here and get you-There he is right there. Hold on.

    Terminal: Got him just out of 9,500-9,000 now.

    Center: Do you know who he is?

    Terminal: We're just, we just we don't know who he is. We're just picking him up now.

    Center (at 9:02): Alright. Heads up man, it looks like another one coming in.

    The controllers observed the plane in a rapid descent; the radar data terminated over Lower Manhattan. At 9:03, United 175 crashed into the South Tower.

    Meanwhile, a manager from Boston Center reported that they had deciphered what they had heard in one of the first hijacker transmissions from American 11: Boston Center: Hey。 you still there?

    New England Region: Yes, I am.

    Boston Center:。 as far as the tape, Bobby seemed to think the guy said that "we have planes." Now, I don't know if it was because it was the accent, or if there's more than one, but I'm gonna, I'm gonna reconfirm that for you, and I'll get back to you real quick. Okay? New England Region: Appreciate it.

    Unidentified Female Voice: They have what?

    Boston Center: Planes, as in plural.

    Boston Center: It sounds like, we're talking to New York, that there's another one aimed at the World Trade Center.

    New England Region: There's another aircraft?

    Boston Center: A second one just hit the Trade Center.

    New England Region: Okay. Yeah, we gotta get-we gotta alert the military real quick on this.

    Boston Center immediately advised the New England Region that it was going to stop all departures at airports under its control. At 9:05, Boston Center confirmed for both the FAA Command Center and the New England Region that the hijackers aboard American 11 said "we have planes." At the same time, New York Center declared "ATC zero"-meaning that aircraft were not permitted to depart from, arrive at, or travel through New York Center's airspace until further notice.

    Within minutes of the second impact, Boston Center instructed its controllers to inform all aircraft in its airspace of the events in New York and to advise aircraft to heighten cockpit security. Boston Center asked the Herndon Command Center to issue a similar cockpit security alert nationwide. We have found no evidence to suggest that the Command Center acted on this request or issued any type of cockpit security alert.

Military Notification and Response. The first indication that the NORAD air defenders had of the second hijacked aircraft, United 175, came in a phone call from New York Center to NEADS at 9:03. The notice came at about the time the plane was hitting the South Tower.

    By 9:08, the mission crew commander at NEADS learned of the second explosion at the World Trade Center and decided against holding the fighters in military airspace away from Manhattan:

    Mission Crew Commander, NEADS: This is what I foresee that we probably need to do. We need to talk to FAA. We need to tell 'em if this stuff is gonna keep on going, we need to take those fighters, put 'em over Manhattan. That's best thing, that's the best play right now. So coordinate with the FAA. Tell 'em if there's more out there, which we don't know, let's get 'em over Manhattan. At least we got some kind of play.

    The FAA cleared the airspace. Radar data show that at 9:13, when the Otis fighters were about 115 miles away from the city, the fighters exited their holding pattern and set a course direct for Manhattan. They arrived at 9:25 and established a combat air patrol (CAP) over the city.

    Because the Otis fighters had expended a great deal of fuel in flying first to military airspace and then to New York, the battle commanders were concerned about refueling. NEADS considered scrambling alert fighters from Langley Air Force Base in Virginia to New York, to provide backup. The Langley fighters were placed on battle stations at 9:09.137 NORAD had no indication that any other plane had been hijacked.

    American Airlines Flight 77 FAA Awareness. American 77 began deviating from its flight plan at 8:54, with a slight turn toward the south. Two minutes later, it disappeared completely from radar at Indianapolis Center, which was controlling the flight.

    The controller tracking American 77 told us he noticed the aircraft turning to the southwest, and then saw the data disappear. The controller looked for primary radar returns. He searched along the plane's projected flight path and the airspace to the southwest where it had started to turn. No primary targets appeared. He tried the radios, first calling the aircraft directly, then the airline. Again there was nothing. At this point, the Indianapolis controller had no knowledge of the situation in New York. He did not know that other aircraft had been hijacked. He believed American 77 had experienced serious electrical or mechanical failure, or both, and was gone.

    Shortly after 9:00, Indianapolis Center started notifying other agencies that American 77 was missing and had possibly crashed. At 9:08, Indianapolis Center asked Air Force Search and Rescue at Langley Air Force Base to look for a downed aircraft. The center also contacted the West Virginia State Police and asked whether any reports of a downed aircraft had been received. At 9:09, it reported the loss of contact to the FAA regional center, which passed this information to FAA headquarters at 9:24.

    By 9:20, Indianapolis Center learned that there were other hijacked aircraft, and began to doubt its initial assumption that American 77 had crashed. A discussion of this concern between the manager at Indianapolis and the Command Center in Herndon prompted it to notify some FAA field facilities that American 77 was lost. By 9:21, the Command Center, some FAA field facilities, and American Airlines had started to search for American 77. They feared it had been hijacked. At 9:25, the Command Center advised FAA headquarters of the situation.

    The failure to find a primary radar return for American 77 led us to investigate this issue further. Radar reconstructions performed after 9/11 reveal that FAA radar equipment tracked the flight from the moment its transponder was turned off at 8:56. But for 8 minutes and 13 seconds, between 8:56 and 9:05, this primary radar information on American 77 was not displayed to controllers at Indianapolis Center.

    The reasons are technical, arising from the way the software processed radar information, as well as from poor primary radar coverage where American 77 was flying.

    According to the radar reconstruction, American 77 reemerged as a primary target on Indianapolis Center radar scopes at 9:05, east of its last known position. The target remained in Indianapolis Center's airspace for another six minutes, then crossed into the western portion of Washington Center's airspace at 9:10. As Indianapolis Center continued searching for the aircraft, two managers and the controller responsible for American 77 looked to the west and southwest along the flight's projected path, not east-where the aircraft was now heading. Managers did not instruct other controllers at Indianapolis Center to turn on their primary radar coverage to join in the search for American 77.

    In sum, Indianapolis Center never saw Flight 77 turn around. By the time it reappeared in primary radar coverage, controllers had either stopped looking for the aircraft because they thought it had crashed or were looking toward the west. Although the Command Center learned Flight 77 was missing, neither it nor FAA headquarters issued an all points bulletin to surrounding centers to search for primary radar targets. American 77 traveled undetected for 36 minutes on a course heading due east for Washington, D.C.

    By 9:25, FAA's Herndon Command Center and FAA headquarters knew two aircraft had crashed into the World Trade Center. They knew American 77 was lost. At least some FAA officials in Boston Center and the New England Region knew that a hijacker on board American 11 had said "we have some planes." Concerns over the safety of other aircraft began to mount. A manager at the Herndon Command Center asked FAA headquarters if they wanted to order a "nationwide ground stop." While this was being discussed by executives at FAA headquarters, the Command Center ordered one at 9:25.

    The Command Center kept looking for American 77. At 9:21, it advised the Dulles terminal control facility, and Dulles urged its controllers to look for primary targets. At 9:32, they found one. Several of the Dulles controllers "observed a primary radar target tracking eastbound at a high rate of speed" and notified Reagan National Airport. FAA personnel at both Reagan National and Dulles airports notified the Secret Service. The aircraft's identity or type was unknown.

    Reagan National controllers then vectored an unarmed National Guard C- 130H cargo aircraft, which had just taken off en route to Minnesota, to identify and follow the suspicious aircraft. The C-130H pilot spotted it, identified it as a Boeing 757, attempted to follow its path, and at 9:38, seconds after impact, reported to the control tower:"looks like that aircraft crashed into the Pentagon sir."

Military Notification and Response. NORAD heard nothing about the search for American 77. Instead, the NEADS air defenders heard renewed reports about a plane that no longer existed: American 11.

    At 9:21, NEADS received a report from the FAA: FAA: Military, Boston Center. I just had a report that American 11 is still in the air, and it's on its way towards-heading towards Washington. NEADS: Okay. American 11 is still in the air?

    FAA: Yes.

    NEADS: On its way towards Washington?

    FAA: That was another-it was evidently another aircraft that hit the tower. That's the latest report we have.

    NEADS: Okay.

    FAA: I'm going to try to confirm an ID for you, but I would assume he's somewhere over, uh, either New Jersey or somewhere further south.

    NEADS: Okay. So American 11 isn't the hijack at all then, right? FAA: No, he is a hijack.

    NEADS: He-American 11 is a hijack?

    FAA: Yes.

    NEADS: And he's heading into Washington?

    FAA: Yes. This could be a third aircraft.

    The mention of a "third aircraft" was not a reference to American 77. There was confusion at that moment in the FAA. Two planes had struck the World Trade Center, and Boston Center had heard from FAA headquarters in Washington that American 11 was still airborne. We have been unable to identify the source of this mistaken FAA information.

    The NEADS technician who took this call from the FAA immediately passed the word to the mission crew commander, who reported to the NEADS battle commander: Mission Crew Commander, NEADS: Okay, uh, American Airlines is still airborne. Eleven, the first guy, he's heading towards Washington. Okay? I think we need to scramble Langley right now. And I'm gonna take the fighters from Otis, try to chase this guy down if I can find him.

    After consulting with NEADS command, the crew commander issued the order at 9:23:"Okay。 scramble Langley. Head them towards the Washington are。 . [I]f they're there then we'll run on the。 . These guys are smart." That order was processed and transmitted to Langley Air Force Base at 9:24. Radar data show the Langley fighters airborne at 9:30. NEADS decided to keep the Otis fighters over New York. The heading of the Langley fighters was adjusted to send them to the Baltimore area. The mission crew commander explained to us that the purpose was to position the Langley fighters between the reported southbound American 11 and the nation's capital.

    At the suggestion of the Boston Center's military liaison, NEADS contacted the FAA's Washington Center to ask about American 11. In the course of the conversation, a Washington Center manager informed NEADS:"We're looking- we also lost American 77." The time was 9:34. This was the first notice to the military that American 77 was missing, and it had come by chance. If NEADS had not placed that call, the NEADS air defenders would have received no information whatsoever that the flight was even missing, although the FAA had been searching for it. No one at FAA headquarters ever asked for military assistance with American 77.

    At 9:36, the FAA's Boston Center called NEADS and relayed the discovery about an unidentified aircraft closing in on Washington:"Latest report. Aircraft VFR [visual flight rules] six miles southeast of the White Hous。 . Six, southwest. Six, southwest of the White House, deviating away." This startling news prompted the mission crew commander at NEADS to take immediate control of the airspace to clear a flight path for the Langley fighters:"Okay, we're going to turn it。 crank it u。 . Run them to the White House." He then discovered, to his surprise, that the Langley fighters were not headed north toward the Baltimore area as instructed, but east over the ocean." I don't care how many windows you break," he said." Damn i。 . Okay. Push them back."

    The Langley fighters were heading east, not north, for three reasons. First, unlike a normal scramble order, this order did not include a distance to the target or the target's location. Second, a "generic" flight plan-prepared to get the aircraft airborne and out of local airspace quickly-incorrectly led the Langley fighters to believe they were ordered to fly due east (090) for 60 miles. Third, the lead pilot and local FAA controller incorrectly assumed the flight plan instruction to go "090 for 60" superseded the original scramble order.

    After the 9:36 call to NEADS about the unidentified aircraft a few miles from the White House, the Langley fighters were ordered to Washington, D.C. Controllers at NEADS located an unknown primary radar track, but "it kind of faded" over Washington. The time was 9:38. The Pentagon had been struck by American 77 at 9:37:46. The Langley fighters were about 150 miles away.

    Right after the Pentagon was hit, NEADS learned of another possible hijacked aircraft. It was an aircraft that in fact had not been hijacked at all. After the second World Trade Center crash, Boston Center managers recognized that both aircraft were transcontinental 767 jetliners that had departed Logan Airport. Remembering the "we have some planes" remark, Boston Center guessed that Delta 1989 might also be hijacked. Boston Center called NEADS at 9:41 and identified Delta 1989, a 767 jet that had left Logan Airport for Las Vegas, as a possible hijack. NEADS warned the FAA's Cleveland Center to watch Delta 1989. The Command Center and FAA headquarters watched it too. During the course of the morning, there were multiple erroneous reports of hijacked aircraft. The report of American 11 heading south was the first; Delta 1989 was the second.

    NEADS never lost track of Delta 1989, and even ordered fighter aircraft from Ohio and Michigan to intercept it. The flight never turned off its transponder. NEADS soon learned that the aircraft was not hijacked, and tracked Delta 1989 as it reversed course over Toledo, headed east, and landed in Cleveland.

    But another aircraft was heading toward Washington, an aircraft about which NORAD had heard nothing: United 93.

    United Airlines Flight 93 FAA Awareness. At 9:27, after having been in the air for 45 minutes, United 93 acknowledged a transmission from the Cleveland Center controller. This was the last normal contact the FAA had with the flight.

    Less than a minute later, the Cleveland controller and the pilots of aircraft in the vicinity heard "a radio transmission of unintelligible sounds of possible screaming or a struggle from an unknown origin."

    The controller responded, seconds later: "Somebody call Cleveland?"This was followed by a second radio transmission, with sounds of screaming. The Cleveland Center controllers began to try to identify the possible source of the transmissions, and noticed that United 93 had descended some 700 feet. The controller attempted again to raise United 93 several times, with no response. At 9:30, the controller began to poll the other flights on his frequency to determine if they had heard the screaming; several said they had.

    At 9:32, a third radio transmission came over the frequency:"Keep remaining sitting. We have a bomb on board." The controller understood, but chose to respond: "Calling Cleveland Center, you're unreadable. Say again, slowly." He notified his supervisor, who passed the notice up the chain of command. By 9:34, word of the hijacking had reached FAA headquarters.

    FAA headquarters had by this time established an open line of communication with the Command Center at Herndon and instructed it to poll all its centers about suspect aircraft. The Command Center executed the request and, a minute later, Cleveland Center reported that "United 93 may have a bomb on board." At 9:34, the Command Center relayed the information concerning United 93 to FAA headquarters. At approximately 9:36, Cleveland advised the Command Center that it was still tracking United 93 and specifically inquired whether someone had requested the military to launch fighter aircraft to intercept the aircraft. Cleveland even told the Command Center it was prepared to contact a nearby military base to make the request. The Command Center told Cleveland that FAA personnel well above them in the chain of command had to make the decision to seek military assistance and were working on the issue.

    Between 9:34 and 9:38, the Cleveland controller observed United 93 climbing to 40,700 feet and immediately moved several aircraft out its way. The controller continued to try to contact United 93, and asked whether the pilot could confirm that he had been hijacked.

    There was no response.

    Then, at 9:39, a fourth radio transmission was heard from United 93: Ziad Jarrah: Uh, this is the captain. Would like you all to remain seated. There is a bomb on board and are going back to the airport, and to have our demands [unintelligible]. Please remain quiet.

    The controller responded: "United 93, understand you have a bomb on board. Go ahead." The flight did not respond.

    From 9:34 to 10:08, a Command Center facility manager provided frequent updates to Acting Deputy Administrator Monte Belger and other executives at FAA headquarters as United 93 headed toward Washington, D.C. At 9:41, Cleveland Center lost United 93's transponder signal. The controller located it on primary radar, matched its position with visual sightings from other aircraft, and tracked the flight as it turned east, then south.

    At 9:42, the Command Center learned from news reports that a plane had struck the Pentagon. The Command Center's national operations manager, Ben Sliney, ordered all FAA facilities to instruct all aircraft to land at the nearest airport. This was an unprecedented order. The air traffic control system handled it with great skill, as about 4,500 commercial and general aviation aircraft soon landed without incident.

    At 9:46 the Command Center updated FAA headquarters that United 93 was now "twenty-nine minutes out of Washington, D.C." At 9:49, 13 minutes after Cleveland Center had asked about getting military help, the Command Center suggested that someone at headquarters should decide whether to request military assistance: FAA Headquarters: They're pulling Jeff away to go talk about United 93.

    Command Center: Uh, do we want to think, uh, about scrambling aircraft?

    FAA Headquarters: Oh, God, I don't know.

    Command Center: Uh, that's a decision somebody's gonna have to make probably in the next ten minutes.

    FAA Headquarters: Uh, ya know everybody just left the room.

    At 9:53, FAA headquarters informed the Command Center that the deputy director for air traffic services was talking to Monte Belger about scrambling aircraft. Then the Command Center informed headquarters that controllers had lost track of United 93 over the Pittsburgh area. Within seconds, the Command Center received a visual report from another aircraft, and informed headquarters that the aircraft was 20 miles northwest of Johnstown. United 93 was spotted by another aircraft, and, at 10:01, the Command Center advised FAA headquarters that one of the aircraft had seen United 93 "waving his wings." The aircraft had witnessed the hijackers' efforts to defeat the passengers' counterattack.

    United 93 crashed in Pennsylvania at 10:03:11, 125 miles from Washington, D.C. The precise crash time has been the subject of some dispute. The 10:03:11 impact time is supported by previous National Transportation Safety Board analysis and by evidence from the Commission staff 's analysis of radar, the flight data recorder, the cockpit voice recorder, infrared satellite data, and air traffic control transmissions.

    Five minutes later, the Command Center forwarded this update to headquarters: Command Center: O.K. Uh, there is now on that United 93.

    FAA Headquarters: Yes.

    Command Center: There is a report of black smoke in the last position I gave you, fifteen miles south of Johnstown.

    FAA Headquarters: From the airplane or from the ground?

    Command Center: Uh, they're speculating it's from the aircraft. FAA Headquarters: Okay.

    Command Center: Uh, who, it hit the ground. That's what they're speculating, that's speculation only.

    The aircraft that spotted the "black smoke" was the same unarmed Air National Guard cargo plane that had seen American 77 crash into the Pentagon 27 minutes earlier. It had resumed its flight to Minnesota and saw the smoke from the crash of United 93, less than two minutes after the plane went down. At 10:17, the Command Center advised headquarters of its conclusion that United 93 had indeed crashed.

    Despite the discussions about military assistance, no one from FAA headquarters requested military assistance regarding United 93. Nor did any manager at FAA headquarters pass any of the information it had about United 93 to the military.

Military Notification and Response. NEADS first received a call about United 93 from the military liaison at Cleveland Center at 10:07. Unaware that the aircraft had already crashed, Cleveland passed to NEADS the aircraft's last known latitude and longitude. NEADS was never able to locate United 93 on radar because it was already in the ground.

    At the same time, the NEADS mission crew commander was dealing with the arrival of the Langley fighters over Washington, D.C., sorting out what their orders were with respect to potential targets. Shortly after 10:10, and having no knowledge either that United 93 had been heading toward Washington or that it had crashed, he explicitly instructed the Langley fighters: "negative- negative clearance to shoot" aircraft over the nation's capital.

    The news of a reported bomb on board United 93 spread quickly at NEADS. The air defenders searched for United 93's primary radar return and tried to locate other fighters to scramble. NEADS called Washington Center to report: NEADS: I also want to give you a heads-up, Washington.

    FAA (DC): Go ahead.

    NEADS: United nine three, have you got information on that yet? FAA: Yeah, he's down.

    NEADS: He's down?

    FAA: Yes.

    NEADS: When did he land? 'Cause we have got confirmation- FAA: He did not land.

    NEADS: Oh, he's down? Down?

    FAA: Yes. Somewhere up northeast of Camp David.

    NEADS: Northeast of Camp David.

    FAA: That's the last report. They don't know exactly where.

    The time of notification of the crash of United 93 was 10:15. The NEADS air defenders never located the flight or followed it on their radar scopes. The flight had already crashed by the time they learned it was hijacked.

Clarifying the Record

    The defense of U.S. airspace on 9/11 was not conducted in accord with preexisting training and protocols. It was improvised by civilians who had never handled a hijacked aircraft that attempted to disappear, and by a military unprepared for the transformation of commercial aircraft into weapons of mass destruction. As it turned out, the NEADS air defenders had nine minutes' notice on the first hijacked plane, no advance notice on the second, no advance notice on the third, and no advance notice on the fourth.

    We do not believe that the true picture of that morning reflects discredit on the operational personnel at NEADS or FAA facilities. NEADS commanders and officers actively sought out information, and made the best judgments they could on the basis of what they knew. Individual FAA controllers, facility managers, and Command Center managers thought outside the box in recommending a nationwide alert, in ground-stopping local traffic, and, ultimately, in deciding to land all aircraft and executing that unprecedented order flawlessly.

    More than the actual events, inaccurate government accounts of those events made it appear that the military was notified in time to respond to two of the hijackings, raising questions about the adequacy of the response. Those accounts had the effect of deflecting questions about the military's capacity to obtain timely and accurate information from its own sources. In addition, they overstated the FAA's ability to provide the military with timely and useful information that morning.

    In public testimony before this Commission in May 2003, NORAD officials stated that at 9:16, NEADS received hijack notification of United 93 from the FAA. This statement was incorrect. There was no hijack to report at 9:16. United 93 was proceeding normally at that time.

    In this same public testimony, NORAD officials stated that at 9:24, NEADS received notification of the hijacking of American 77. This statement was also incorrect. The notice NEADS received at 9:24 was that American 11 had not hit the World Trade Center and was heading for Washington, D.C.

    In their testimony and in other public accounts, NORAD officials also stated that the Langley fighters were scrambled to respond to the notifications about American 77,178 United 93, or both. These statements were incorrect as well. The fighters were scrambled because of the report that American 11 was heading south, as is clear not just from taped conversations at NEADS but also from taped conversations at FAA centers; contemporaneous logs compiled at NEADS, Continental Region headquarters, and NORAD; and other records. Yet this response to a phantom aircraft was not recounted in a single public timeline or statement issued by the FAA or Department of Defense. The inaccurate accounts created the impression that the Langley scramble was a logical response to an actual hijacked aircraft.

    In fact, not only was the scramble prompted by the mistaken information about American 11, but NEADS never received notice that American 77 was hijacked. It was notified at 9:34 that American 77 was lost. Then, minutes later, NEADS was told that an unknown plane was 6 miles southwest of the White House. Only then did the already scrambled airplanes start moving directly toward Washington, D.C.

    Thus the military did not have 14 minutes to respond to American 77, as testimony to the Commission in May 2003 suggested. It had at most one or two minutes to react to the unidentified plane approaching Washington, and the fighters were in the wrong place to be able to help. They had been responding to a report about an aircraft that did not exist.

    Nor did the military have 47 minutes to respond to United 93, as would be implied by the account that it received notice of the flight's hijacking at 9:16. By the time the military learned about the flight, it had crashed. We now turn to the role of national leadership in the events that morning.

NATIONAL CRISIS MANAGEMENT
	
    When American 11 struck the World Trade Center at 8:46, no one in the White House or traveling with the President knew that it had been hijacked. While that information circulated within the FAA, we found no evidence that the hijacking was reported to any other agency in Washington before 8:46.

    Most federal agencies learned about the crash in New York from CNN.

    Within the FAA, the administrator, Jane Garvey, and her acting deputy, Monte Belger, had not been told of a confirmed hijacking before they learned from television that a plane had crashed.

    Others in the agency were aware of it, as we explained earlier in this chapter.

    Inside the National Military Command Center, the deputy director of operations and his assistant began notifying senior Pentagon officials of the incident. At about 9:00, the senior NMCC operations officer reached out to the FAA operations center for information. Although the NMCC was advised of the hijacking of American 11, the scrambling of jets was not discussed.

    In Sarasota, Florida, the presidential motorcade was arriving at the Emma E. Booker Elementary School, where President Bush was to read to a class and talk about education. White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card told us he was standing with the President outside the classroom when Senior Advisor to the President Karl Rove first informed them that a small, twin-engine plane had crashed into the World Trade Center. The President's reaction was that the incident must have been caused by pilot error.

    At 8:55, before entering the classroom, the President spoke to National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice, who was at the White House. She recalled first telling the President it was a twin-engine aircraft-and then a commercial aircraft-that had struck the World Trade Center, adding "that's all we know right now, Mr. President."

    At the White House, Vice President Dick Cheney had just sat down for a meeting when his assistant told him to turn on his television because a plane had struck the NorthTower of the World Trade Center. The Vice President was wondering "how the hell could a plane hit the World Trade Center" when he saw the second aircraft strike the South Tower.

    Elsewhere in the White House, a series of 9:00 meetings was about to begin. In the absence of information that the crash was anything other than an accident, the White House staff monitored the news as they went ahead with their regular schedules.

The Agencies Confer
	
    When they learned a second plane had struck the World Trade Center, nearly everyone in the White House told us, they immediately knew it was not an accident. The Secret Service initiated a number of security enhancements around the White House complex. The officials who issued these orders did not know that there were additional hijacked aircraft, or that one such aircraft was en route to Washington. These measures were precautionary steps taken because of the strikes in New York.

    The FAA and White House Teleconferences. The FAA, the White House, and the Defense Department each initiated a multiagency teleconference before 9:30. Because none of these teleconferences-at least before 10:00- included the right officials from both the FAA and Defense Department, none succeeded in meaningfully coordinating the military and FAA response to the hijackings.

    At about 9:20, security personnel at FAA headquarters set up a hijacking teleconference with several agencies, including the Defense Department. The NMCC officer who participated told us that the call was monitored only periodically because the information was sporadic, it was of little value, and there were other important tasks. The FAA manager of the teleconference also remembered that the military participated only briefly before the Pentagon was hit. Both individuals agreed that the teleconference played no role in coordinating a response to the attacks of 9/11. Acting Deputy Administrator Belger was frustrated to learn later in the morning that the military had not been on the call.

    At the White House, the video teleconference was conducted from the Situation Room by Richard Clarke, a special assistant to the president long involved in counterterrorism. Logs indicate that it began at 9:25 and included the CIA; the FBI; the departments of State, Justice, and Defense; the FAA; and the White House shelter. The FAA and CIA joined at 9:40. The first topic addressed in the White House video teleconference-at about 9:40-was the physical security of the President, the White House, and federal agencies. Immediately thereafter it was reported that a plane had hit the Pentagon. We found no evidence that video teleconference participants had any prior information that American 77 had been hijacked and was heading directly toward Washington. Indeed, it is not clear to us that the video teleconference was fully under way before 9:37, when the Pentagon was struck.

    Garvey, Belger, and other senior officials from FAA headquarters participated in this video teleconference at various times. We do not know who from Defense participated, but we know that in the first hour none of the personnel involved in managing the crisis did. And none of the information conveyed in the White House video teleconference, at least in the first hour, was being passed to the NMCC. As one witness recalled, "[It] was almost like there were parallel decisionmaking processes going on; one was a voice conference orchestrated by the NMCC。 and then there was the [White House video teleconference。 . [I]n my mind they were competing venues for command and control and decisionmaking."

    At 10:03, the conference received reports of more missing aircraft, "2 possibly 3 aloft," and learned of a combat air patrol over Washington. There was discussion of the need for rules of engagement. Clarke reported that they were asking the President for authority to shoot down aircraft. Confirmation of that authority came at 10:25, but the commands were already being conveyed in more direct contacts with the Pentagon.

The Pentagon Teleconferences. Inside the National Military Command Center, the deputy director for operations immediately thought the second strike was a terrorist attack. The job of the NMCC in such an emergency is to gather the relevant parties and establish the chain of command between the National Command Authority-the president and the secretary of defense- and those who need to carry out their orders.

    On the morning of September 11, Secretary Rumsfeld was having breakfast at the Pentagon with a group of members of Congress. He then returned to his office for his daily intelligence briefing. The Secretary was informed of the second strike in New York during the briefing; he resumed the briefing while awaiting more information. After the Pentagon was struck, Secretary Rumsfeld went to the parking lot to assist with rescue efforts.

    Inside the NMCC, the deputy director for operations called for an allpurpose "significant event" conference. It began at 9:29, with a brief recap: two aircraft had struck the World Trade Center, there was a confirmed hijacking of American 11, and Otis fighters had been scrambled. The FAA was asked to provide an update, but the line was silent because the FAA had not been added to the call. A minute later, the deputy director stated that it had just been confirmed that American 11 was still airborne and heading toward D.C. He directed the transition to an air threat conference call. NORAD confirmed that American 11 was airborne and heading toward Washington, relaying the erroneous FAA information already mentioned. The call then ended, at about 9:34.

    It resumed at 9:37 as an air threat conference call,* which lasted more than eight hours. The President, Vice President, Secretary of Defense, Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Deputy National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley all participated in this teleconference at various times, as did military personnel from the White House underground shelter and the President's military aide on Air Force One.

    Operators worked feverishly to include the FAA, but they had equipment problems and difficulty finding secure phone numbers. NORAD asked three times before 10:03 to confirm the presence of the FAA in the teleconference. The FAA representative who finally joined the call at 10:17 had no familiarity with or responsibility for hijackings, no access to decisionmakers, and none of the information available to senior FAA officials.

    * All times given for this conference call are estimates, which we and the Department of Defense believe to be accurate within a � 3 minute margin of error.

    We found no evidence that, at this critical time, NORAD's top commanders, in Florida or Cheyenne Mountain, coordinated with their counterparts at FAA headquarters to improve awareness and organize a common response. Lower-level officials improvised-for example, the FAA's Boston Center bypassed the chain of command and directly contacted NEADS after the first hijacking. But the highest-level Defense Department officials relied on the NMCC's air threat conference, in which the FAA did not participate for the first 48 minutes.

    At 9:39, the NMCC's deputy director for operations, a military officer, opened the call from the Pentagon, which had just been hit. He began:"An air attack against North America may be in progress. NORAD, what's the situation?" NORAD said it had conflicting reports. Its latest information was "of a possible hijacked aircraft taking off out of JFK en route to Washington D.C." The NMCC reported a crash into the mall side of the Pentagon and requested that the Secretary of Defense be added to the conference.

    At 9:44, NORAD briefed the conference on the possible hijacking of Delta 1989. Two minutes later, staff reported that they were still trying to locate Secretary Rumsfeld and Vice Chairman Myers. The Vice Chairman joined the conference shortly before 10:00; the Secretary, shortly before 10:30. The Chairman was out of the country.

    At 9:48, a representative from the White House shelter asked if there were any indications of another hijacked aircraft. The deputy director for operations mentioned the Delta flight and concluded that "that would be the fourth possible hijack." At 9:49, the commander of NORAD directed all air sovereignty aircraft to battle stations, fully armed.

    At 9:59, an Air Force lieutenant colonel working in the White House Military Office joined the conference and stated he had just talked to Deputy National Security Advisor Stephen Hadley. The White House requested (1) the implementation of continuity of government measures, (2) fighter escorts for Air Force One, and (3) a fighter combat air patrol over Washington, D.C.

    By 10:03, when United 93 crashed in Pennsylvania, there had been no mention of its hijacking and the FAA had not yet been added to the teleconference.

    The President and the Vice President The President was seated in a classroom when, at 9:05, Andrew Card whispered to him: "A second plane hit the second tower. America is under attack." The President told us his instinct was to project calm, not to have the country see an excited reaction at a moment of crisis. The press was standing behind the children; he saw their phones and pagers start to ring. The President felt he should project strength and calm until he could better understand what was happening.

    The President remained in the classroom for another five to seven minutes,

    while the children continued reading. He then returned to a holding room shortly before 9:15, where he was briefed by staff and saw television coverage. He next spoke to Vice President Cheney, Dr. Rice, New York Governor George Pataki, and FBI Director Robert Mueller. He decided to make a brief statement from the school before leaving for the airport. The Secret Service told us they were anxious to move the President to a safer location, but did not think it imperative for him to run out the door.

    Between 9:15 and 9:30, the staff was busy arranging a return to Washington, while the President consulted his senior advisers about his remarks. No one in the traveling party had any information during this time that other aircraft were hijacked or missing. Staff was in contact with the White House Situation Room, but as far as we could determine, no one with the President was in contact with the Pentagon. The focus was on the President's statement to the nation. The only decision made during this time was to return to Washington.

    The President's motorcade departed at 9:35, and arrived at the airport between 9:42 and 9:45. During the ride the President learned about the attack on the Pentagon. He boarded the aircraft, asked the Secret Service about the safety of his family, and called the Vice President. According to notes of the call, at about 9:45 the President told the Vice President:"Sounds like we have a minor war going on here, I heard about the Pentagon. We're at war。 somebody's going to pay."

    About this time, Card, the lead Secret Service agent, the President's military aide, and the pilot were conferring on a possible destination for Air Force One. The Secret Service agent felt strongly that the situation in Washington was too unstable for the President to return there, and Card agreed. The President strongly wanted to return to Washington and only grudgingly agreed to go elsewhere. The issue was still undecided when the President conferred with the Vice President at about the time Air Force One was taking off. The Vice President recalled urging the President not to return to Washington. Air Force One departed at about 9:54 without any fixed destination. The objective was to get up in the air-as fast and as high as possible-and then decide where to go.

    At 9:33, the tower supervisor at Reagan National Airport picked up a hotline to the Secret Service and told the Service's operations center that "an aircraft [is] coming at you and not talking with us." This was the first specific report to the Secret Service of a direct threat to the White House. No move was made to evacuate the Vice President at this time. As the officer who took the call explained, "[I was] about to push the alert button when the tower advised that the aircraft was turning south and approaching Reagan National Airport."

    American 77 began turning south, away from the White House, at 9:34. It continued heading south for roughly a minute, before turning west and beginning to circle back. This news prompted the Secret Service to order the immediate evacuation of the Vice President just before 9:36. Agents propelled him out of his chair and told him he had to get to the bunker. The Vice President entered the underground tunnel leading to the shelter at 9:37.

    Once inside, Vice President Cheney and the agents paused in an area of the tunnel that had a secure phone, a bench, and television. The Vice President asked to speak to the President, but it took time for the call to be connected. He learned in the tunnel that the Pentagon had been hit, and he saw television coverage of smoke coming from the building.

    The Secret Service logged Mrs. Cheney's arrival at the White House at 9:52, and she joined her husband in the tunnel. According to contemporaneous notes, at 9:55 the Vice President was still on the phone with the President advising that three planes were missing and one had hit the Pentagon. We believe this is the same call in which the Vice President urged the President not to return to Washington. After the call ended, Mrs. Cheney and the Vice President moved from the tunnel to the shelter conference room.

    United 93 and the Shootdown Order On the morning of 9/11, the President and Vice President stayed in contact not by an open line of communication but through a series of calls. The President told us he was frustrated with the poor communications that morning. He could not reach key officials, including Secretary Rumsfeld, for a period of time. The line to the White House shelter conference room-and the Vice President- kept cutting off.

    The Vice President remembered placing a call to the President just after entering the shelter conference room. There is conflicting evidence about when the Vice President arrived in the shelter conference room. We have concluded, from the available evidence, that the Vice President arrived in the room shortly before 10:00, perhaps at 9:58. The Vice President recalled being told, just after his arrival, that the Air Force was trying to establish a combat air patrol over Washington.

    The Vice President stated that he called the President to discuss the rules of engagement for the CAP. He recalled feeling that it did no good to establish the CAP unless the pilots had instructions on whether they were authorized to shoot if the plane would not divert. He said the President signed off on that concept. The President said he remembered such a conversation, and that it reminded him of when he had been an interceptor pilot. The President emphasized to us that he had authorized the shootdown of hijacked aircraft.

    The Vice President's military aide told us he believed the Vice President spoke to the President just after entering the conference room, but he did not hear what they said. Rice, who entered the room shortly after the Vice President and sat next to him, remembered hearing him inform the President, "Sir, the CAPs are up. Sir, they're going to want to know what to do." Then she recalled hearing him say, "Yes sir." She believed this conversation occurred a few minutes, perhaps five, after they entered the conference room.

    We believe this call would have taken place sometime before 10:10 to 10:15.

    Among the sources that reflect other important events of that morning, there is no documentary evidence for this call, but the relevant sources are incomplete. Others nearby who were taking notes, such as the Vice President's chief of staff, Scooter Libby, who sat next to him, and Mrs. Cheney, did not note a call between the President and Vice President immediately after the Vice President entered the conference room.

    At 10:02, the communicators in the shelter began receiving reports from the Secret Service of an inbound aircraft-presumably hijacked-heading toward Washington. That aircraft was United 93. The Secret Service was getting this information directly from the FAA. The FAA may have been tracking the progress of United 93 on a display that showed its projected path to Washington, not its actual radar return. Thus, the Secret Service was relying on projections and was not aware the plane was already down in Pennsylvania.

    At some time between 10:10 and 10:15, a military aide told the Vice President and others that the aircraft was 80 miles out. Vice President Cheney was asked for authority to engage the aircraft.

    His reaction was described by Scooter Libby as quick and decisive, "in about the time it takes a batter to decide to swing." The Vice President authorized fighter aircraft to engage the inbound plane. He told us he based this authorization on his earlier conversation with the President. The military aide returned a few minutes later, probably between 10:12 and 10:18, and said the aircraft was 60 miles out. He again asked for authorization to engage. The Vice President again said yes.

    At the conference room table was White House Deputy Chief of Staff Joshua Bolten. Bolten watched the exchanges and, after what he called "a quiet moment,"suggested that the Vice President get in touch with the President and confirm the engage order. Bolten told us he wanted to make sure the President was told that the Vice President had executed the order. He said he had not heard any prior discussion on the subject with the President.

    The Vice President was logged calling the President at 10:18 for a twominute conversation that obtained the confirmation. On Air Force One, the President's press secretary was taking notes; Ari Fleischer recorded that at 10:20, the President told him that he had authorized a shootdown of aircraft if necessary.

    Minutes went by and word arrived of an aircraft down in Pennsylvania. Those in the shelter wondered if the aircraft had been shot down pursuant to this authorization.

    At approximately 10:30, the shelter started receiving reports of another hijacked plane, this time only 5 to 10 miles out. Believing they had only a minute or two, the Vice President again communicated the authorization to "engage or "take out" the aircraft. At 10:33, Hadley told the air threat conference call: "I need to get word to Dick Myers that our reports are there's an inbound aircraft flying low 5 miles out. The Vice President's guidance was we need to take them out."

    Once again, there was no immediate information about the fate of the inbound aircraft. In the apt description of one witness, "It drops below the radar screen and it's just continually hovering in your imagination; you don't know where it is or what happens to it." Eventually, the shelter received word that the alleged hijacker 5 miles away had been a medevac helicopter.

    Transmission of the Authorization from the White House to the Pilots The NMCC learned of United 93's hijacking at about 10:03. At this time the FAA had no contact with the military at the level of national command. The NMCC learned about United 93 from the White House. It, in turn, was informed by the Secret Service's contacts with the FAA.

    NORAD had no information either. At 10:07, its representative on the air threat conference call stated that NORAD had "no indication of a hijack heading to DC at this time."

    Repeatedly between 10:14 and 10:19, a lieutenant colonel at the White House relayed to the NMCC that the Vice President had confirmed fighters were cleared to engage inbound aircraft if they could verify that the aircraft was hijacked.

    The commander of NORAD, General Ralph Eberhart, was en route to the NORAD operations center in Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado, when the shootdown order was communicated on the air threat conference call. He told us that by the time he arrived, the order had already been passed down NORAD's chain of command.

    It is not clear how the shootdown order was communicated within NORAD. But we know that at 10:31, General Larry Arnold instructed his staff to broadcast the following over a NORAD instant messaging system: "10:31 Vice president has cleared to us to intercept tracks of interest and shoot them down if they do not respond per [General Arnold]."

    In upstate New York, NEADS personnel first learned of the shootdown order from this message: Floor Leadership: You need to read thi。 . The Region Commander has declared that we can shoot down aircraft that do not respond to our direction. Copy that?

    Controllers: Copy that, sir.

    Floor Leadership: So if you're trying to divert somebody and he won't divert- Controllers: DO [Director of Operations] is saying no.

    Floor Leadership: No? It came over the cha。 . You got a conflict on that direction?

    Controllers: Right now no, but- Floor Leadership: Okay? Okay, you read that from the Vice President, right? Vice President has cleared. Vice President has cleared us to intercept traffic and shoot them down if they do not respond per [General Arnold]. In interviews with us, NEADS personnel expressed considerable confusion over the nature and effect of the order.

    The NEADS commander told us he did not pass along the order because he was unaware of its ramifications. Both the mission commander and the senior weapons director indicated they did not pass the order to the fighters circling Washington and New York because they were unsure how the pilots would, or should, proceed with this guidance. In short, while leaders in Washington believed that the fighters above them had been instructed to "take out" hostile aircraft, the only orders actually conveyed to the pilots were to "ID type and tail."

    In most cases, the chain of command authorizing the use of force runs from the president to the secretary of defense and from the secretary to the combatant commander. The President apparently spoke to Secretary Rumsfeld for the first time that morning shortly after 10:00. No one can recall the content of this conversation, but it was a brief call in which the subject of shootdown authority was not discussed.

    At 10:39, the Vice President updated the Secretary on the air threat conference: Vice President: There's been at least three instances here where we've had reports of aircraft approaching Washington-a couple were confirmed hijack. And, pursuant to the President's instructions I gave authorization for them to be taken out. Hello?

    SecDef: Yes, I understand. Who did you give that direction to?

    Vice President: It was passed from here through the [operations] center at the White House, from the [shelter].

    SecDef: OK, let me ask the question here. Has that directive been transmitted to the aircraft?

    Vice President: Yes, it has.

    SecDef: So we've got a couple of aircraft up there that have those instructions at this present time?

    Vice President: That is correct. And it's my understanding they've already taken a couple of aircraft out.

    SecDef: We can't confirm that. We're told that one aircraft is down but we do not have a pilot report that did it.

    As this exchange shows, Secretary Rumsfeld was not in the NMCC when the shootdown order was first conveyed. He went from the parking lot to his office (where he spoke to the President), then to the Executive Support Center, where he participated in the White House video teleconference. He moved to the NMCC shortly before 10:30, in order to join Vice Chairman Myers. Secretary Rumsfeld told us he was just gaining situational awareness when he spoke with the Vice President at 10:39. His primary concern was ensuring that the pilots had a clear understanding of their rules of engagement.

    The Vice President was mistaken in his belief that shootdown authorization had been passed to the pilots flying at NORAD's direction. By 10:45 there was, however, another set of fighters circling Washington that had entirely different rules of engagement. These fighters, part of the 113th Wing of the District of Columbia Air National Guard, launched out of Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland in response to information passed to them by the Secret Service. The first of the Andrews fighters was airborne at 10:38.

    General David Wherley-the commander of the 113th Wing-reached out to the Secret Service after hearing secondhand reports that it wanted fighters airborne. A Secret Service agent had a phone in each ear, one connected to Wherley and the other to a fellow agent at the White House, relaying instructions that the White House agent said he was getting from the Vice President. The guidance for Wherley was to send up the aircraft, with orders to protect the White House and take out any aircraft that threatened the Capitol. General Wherley translated this in military terms to flying "weapons free"-that is, the decision to shoot rests in the cockpit, or in this case in the cockpit of the lead pilot. He passed these instructions to the pilots that launched at 10:42 and afterward.

    Thus, while the fighter pilots under NORAD direction who had scrambled out of Langley never received any type of engagement order, the Andrews pilots were operating weapons free-a permissive rule of engagement. The President and the Vice President indicated to us they had not been aware that fighters had been scrambled out of Andrews, at the request of the Secret Service and outside the military chain of command.

    There is no evidence that NORAD headquarters or military officials in the NMCC knew-during the morning of September 11-that the Andrews planes were airborne and operating under different rules of engagement.

What If?

    NORAD officials have maintained consistently that had the passengers not caused United 93 to crash, the military would have prevented it from reaching Washington, D.C. That conclusion is based on a version of events that we now know is incorrect. The Langley fighters were not scrambled in response to United 93; NORAD did not have 47 minutes to intercept the flight; NORAD did not even know the plane was hijacked until after it had crashed. It is appropriate, therefore, to reconsider whether United 93 would have been intercepted.

    Had it not crashed in Pennsylvania at 10:03, we estimate that United 93 could not have reached Washington any earlier than 10:13, and probably would have arrived before 10:23. There was only one set of fighters circling Washington during that time frame-the Langley F-16s. They were armed and under NORAD's control. After NEADS learned of the hijacking at 10:07, NORAD would have had from 6 to 16 minutes to locate the flight, receive authorization to shoot it down, and communicate the order to the pilots, who (in the same span) would have had to authenticate the order, intercept the flight, and execute the order.

    At that point in time, the Langley pilots did not know the threat they were facing, did not know where United 93 was located, and did not have shootdown authorization.

    First, the Langley pilots were never briefed about the reason they were scrambled. As the lead pilot explained, "I reverted to the Russian threa。 . I'm thinking cruise missile threat from the sea. You know you look down and see the Pentagon burning and I thought the bastards snuck one by u。 . [Y]ou couldn't see any airplanes, and no one told us anything." The pilots knew their mission was to divert aircraft, but did not know that the threat came from hijacked airliners.

    Second, NEADS did not have accurate information on the location of United 93. Presumably FAA would have provided such information, but we do not know how long that would have taken, nor how long it would have taken NEADS to locate the target.

    Third, NEADS needed orders to pass to the pilots. At 10:10, the pilots over Washington were emphatically told, "negative clearance to shoot." Shootdown authority was first communicated to NEADS at 10:31. It is possible that NORAD commanders would have ordered a shootdown in the absence of the authorization communicated by the Vice President, but given the gravity of the decision to shoot down a commercial airliner, and NORAD's caution that a mistake not be made, we view this possibility as unlikely.

    NORAD officials have maintained that they would have intercepted and shot down United 93. We are not so sure. We are sure that the nation owes a debt to the passengers of United 93. Their actions saved the lives of countless others, and may have saved either the Capitol or the White House from destruction.

    The details of what happened on the morning of September 11 are complex, but they play out a simple theme. NORAD and the FAA were unprepared for the type of attacks launched against the United States on September 11, 2001. They struggled, under difficult circumstances, to improvise a homeland defense against an unprecedented challenge they had never before encountered and had never trained to meet.

    At 10:02 that morning, an assistant to the mission crew commander at NORAD's Northeast Air Defense Sector in Rome, New York, was working with his colleagues on the floor of the command center. In a brief moment of reflection, he was recorded remarking that "This is a new type of war."

    He was, and is, right. But the conflict did not begin on 9/11. It had been publicly declared years earlier, most notably in a declaration faxed early in 1998 to an Arabic-language newspaper in London. Few Americans had noticed it. The fax had been sent from thousands of miles away by the followers of a Saudi exile gathered in one of the most remote and impoverished countries on earth.

		
	


































